     __________________________________________________________________

         Title: The Hymn as Literature
    Creator(s): Reeves, Jeremiah Bascom
   Print Basis: New York: The Century Co., 1924
        Rights: Public domain in the U.S. and Canada: 1924 U.S. publication by
                U.S. author; copyright not renewed.
    LC Call no: BV 467
     __________________________________________________________________

THE
HYMN AS LITERATURE

   BY
   JEREMIAH BASCOM REEVES, Ph.D.
   Professor of English, Westminster College

   THE CENTURY CO.
   New York and London

   Copyright, 1924, by
   The Century Co.

   PRINTED IN U. S. A.

   To
   RICHARD EARLY REEVES
   and to
   LILLIAN REEVES WYATT
   I DEDICATE THIS BOOK
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE

   The hymn as the most ancient type of literature and as a most pervasive
   and powerful kind of poetry has not had its just dues from the critics.
   They have not so much frowned upon the hymn as they have given it a
   sort of deferential toleration, exempting it from its liabilities as
   well as its rights in the realm of letters. Of the scores of books
   about hymns not one, so far as I know, has sought definitely to bound
   and describe the hymn as the small but rich province of poetry that it
   is.

   The student of the hymn must own his obligation to John Julian's great
   "[1]Dictionary of Hymnology" and to such other authorities as Duffield,
   Miller, and [2]Brownlie, as well as to the excellent work of Dr.
   Benson, Dr. Breed, [3]Dr. Nutter and Dr. Tillett, Mr. Price, Mr. Ninde
   and others.

   This book began as a task and grew into rather an enthusiasm. I owe
   many thanks to Professors J. Q. Adams, Clark S. Northup, F. C. Prescott
   of Cornell University, and especially to Professor Martin W. Sampson, a
   critic kind, severe, and inspiring.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                      THE
                               HYMN AS LITERATURE

CHAPTER I
THE HYMN

   It is remarkable that English literary criticism has given so little
   attention to a form of literature that holds so large a place in the
   attention of the people as does the hymn. For the hymn is the most
   popular kind of English poetry. If this appear to be an immoderate
   statement, let the objector find and bring forward another type of
   poetry that is read so frequently by so many people and, at least
   apparently, with so much approval. If one should count the number of
   persons in any English-speaking town who had read epic poetry during
   the last week, or who had read dramatic poetry, or, excepting one book,
   who had read fifty lines of lyrical poetry, he would find the number
   relatively quite small. But last week in a small American city there
   were thirty-seven hundred persons who read or went over at least three
   hymns. That there were three times thirty-seven hundred readings of
   lyrical poetry by the people of a typical small community in the
   ordinary course of its affairs in one week is a fact of real
   significance to the student of American life and literature.

   To remember that this popular esteem accorded the hymn extends
   throughout all countries where the English language is spoken, is to be
   assured that verse is alive and powerful in the world to-day.

   It is a fact that the largest single edition of any merchantable book
   in the United States up to 1912 was the first edition of a volume of
   lyrical verse, a hymn-book. And the enormous first edition of that book
   was followed in the same year by two other printings. Between July,
   1905, and December, 1920, it had passed through thirty-two printings.
   The sale of this book, according to a statement by the publishers, has
   been something over two million copies. It should be remarked that this
   is but one book of but one branch of the Christian church in the United
   States. In England there is a single collection of hymns that has far
   out-distanced this; before the beginning of the World War it had
   reached an output of no fewer than sixty million copies. These two
   collections, the English "Hymns Ancient and Modern" and the American
   "Methodist Hymnal," are of course by no means all of the hymn-books;
   they are but two among hundreds of similar collections. In this country
   the "Methodist Hymnal," although it is the largest in point of numbers
   issued, has many great companions in the field. The Baptist,
   Congregational, Presbyterian, and [4]Protestant Episcopal hymn-books
   are notable for the extent of their circulation. There are many other
   hymnals issued by various branches of the church, as for example, the
   Friends and the Unitarians. The Roman Catholics have a number of good
   books of English hymns.

   Besides these there are several standard hymnals issued by great
   publishing houses, which have wide circulation. The Anglican "Hymns
   Ancient and Modern," vastly as it is distributed, is not an official
   hymn-book of the Church of England; there are scores of other Church of
   England hymn-books. In the British Isles, besides these, there are many
   great hymnals, great both in quality and in point of wide distribution,
   issued by the Irish, Scottish, Roman Catholic, and Non-Conforming
   churches. It is much the same in Canada, South Africa, and Australasia.
   The English hymn holds wide sway wherever the English language is
   spoken.

   Of smaller general distribution than those just mentioned, yet mounting
   into enormous numbers, are the hymn-books of particular religious
   societies and minor independent organizations. One of the Mormon
   hymn-books, for example, is now in its twenty-fifth edition, the
   editions having been of ten thousand volumes each. There is a small
   religious body, made up originally from Swiss, German, and Dutch
   immigrants, called Mennonites. This comparatively minute branch of the
   church has issued, according to information received from its
   publishing house, about two hundred thousand copies. A collection of
   songs, mainly ephemeral and not always innocuous, is printed endlessly;
   this type of book would hardly be mentioned here did it not almost
   invariably include a number of the worthy hymns without which it could
   not well stand alone. Astonishingly large numbers of hymn-books are
   brought out by standard publishing houses. One of these, "The American
   Hymnal," containing 726 hymns, has had a sale of nearly one hundred
   thousand copies; another, "The Army and Navy Hymnal," is in use in
   every camp, on every ship, and in every naval station of the United
   States. Another, "Hymns of Worship and Service," has had an output of
   well over half a million copies. Another, "Hymnal for American Youth,"
   sells at the rate of fifty thousand copies a year. This last is a book
   designed for young persons, containing 342 lyrics; it is but one of the
   twenty-two hymn-books published by a single publishing house. It should
   be noted, too, that none of these are pamphlets or anything less than
   standard full-cloth octavo books selling at standard prices. Details
   like these indicate a wide popularity for the hymn-book.

   By the term "hymn-book" as it is used throughout this volume is meant
   no particular compilation of hymns, but that corpus of religious
   lyrical verse selected by a remarkably distinct consensus of taste, and
   constituting, with slight variations, the body of every good
   collection.

   The hymn itself may be defined as a lyrical composition expressive of
   religious aspiration, petition, confession, communion, or praise; a
   song devoted to the fellowship of souls and the worship of God. In its
   broader sense the term includes canticles, psalms, carols,
   "spirituals," and chants; in its more limited sense it includes only
   religious lyrics in rime and meter--in a style of very definite and
   narrow restrictions. The good hymn combines in quite remarkable effect
   the straitest simplicity, clarity, dignity, and melody, rich ideas
   about the basic matters of life and death, with strong emotion under
   sure control.

   It seems safe to state without any reservations that this type, of all
   forms of English poetry to-day, stands first in popular favor. The
   hymn-book--the fairly uniform compilation of the standard hymns of the
   English language--is published and sold to an extent not approached by
   the publications of any other types of poetry.

   And the hymn-book does not merely reach an enormous printing; it is
   actually opened and read more often than any other book of poetry. This
   fact becomes more apparent as one endeavors to call to mind other books
   of verse that begin to rival the hymn-book in this respect. Further,
   when verses from the hymn-books are being used it is not infrequent
   that two persons are reading the same page at the same time, while
   others may be repeating the lyric from memory without any book--as
   Lincoln and Roosevelt are said usually to have done. Of course many
   persons may read more often from Shakspere or Byron or Edgar Guest;
   some may never open a hymn-book. The statement here is that among
   English-speaking people generally, the sum of times that the hymn-book
   is taken up and read is larger than the sum of times that any other
   book of poetry is read.

   This sway of the religious song in the lives of American people is not
   a new thing; the hymn has maintained a lyrical regnancy continuously
   and from the very first. And the hymn, though essentially deep-moving
   and intimate, has nevertheless exerted its power at times in a quite
   regal and dramatic manner.

   It is with an outburst of religious song that the curtain goes up on
   the whole drama of America. American history opens with the singing of
   a Christian hymn. On the evening of September 25, 1492, one of the
   companions of Columbus saw what he thought to be land lying dimly in
   the west. Though it was not America yet, still, over those strange
   waters rang out the first greeting to America. From all three of the
   ships, as Columbus himself gives the account in his diary, there rose
   the sound of the old "Gloria in Excelsis Deo." Then later, on Friday
   night, October 12, when they saw a light glimmering on the shore of the
   New World, the cry went up, and "Salve Regina" swept out over the
   water. The Old World was greeting the New World with a hymn.

   Again, the first English book printed in the Western hemisphere was the
   old English hymnal, "The Bay Psalm Book." Spanish Roman Catholic
   sailors had come singing hymns; and Anglo-Saxon Puritan settlers sent
   back a hymn-book, the first literary offering of the New World to the
   Old. It is worth noting that the offering was well received. It
   afterward went through many English editions. Of course the hymns sung
   on Columbus's ships were in Latin, and the songs of the New England
   book were rough-hewn translations of the Psalms into English verse, but
   they were all, in the broader sense of the word, true hymns.

   The great Northwest was opened to civilization and claimed for France
   with the singing of hymns. And La Salle, discovering the mouth of the
   Mississippi River, stood on the bank and claimed all the vast region
   for France in a ceremony marked by the singing of three hymns.

   By the New Englanders' firesides, at their social gatherings, and on
   their austere Sabbaths, the hymns, or metrical psalms, held a large
   place; and the emotions and ideals which these lyrics bore could not
   but enter into the fiber of the people's lives.

   Along the Atlantic coast the Indians could hear from the clearings of
   the white men, mingled with sounds of cattle and barn-yard fowl and
   busy ax, here and there from women at their work, from families in
   their cabins at night, from gatherings in groves and log
   meeting-houses, the sound of hymns. And there were Indians who learned
   to sing them. A letter, for example, to Sir William Ashurst from New
   England describes the Indians' "excellent singing the Psalms with most
   ravishing melody." It did not take the Southern slaves long to learn
   their masters' hymns and to make sweet and plaintive ones of their own.
   No one can guess how much the American negro's hymns have meant to him
   in making for consolation and piety and virtue. They have played, and
   still play, a large part in his life.

   Scattered details here and there in the records of past American life
   indicate even to the casual reader how intimately religious lyrical
   verse entered into that life. "The Bay Psalm Book" was printed in the
   modest dwelling of the first president of Harvard. President Dwight of
   Yale, chaplain-general of the Revolutionary Army, edited and partly
   wrote what was for years the leading hymn- and psalm-book in the
   country. President Davies of Princeton was in his day a leading
   American hymn-writer.

   In 1737, at Charlestown, South Carolina, a young Oxford graduate, John
   Wesley, Anglican priest, chaplain to Oglethorpe, and missionary to the
   Indians, published the first real hymn-book--as distinguished from the
   metrical psalm-book--of the Church of England. Thus in America began
   the sequence of great English hymn-books.

   Among the earliest extant writing in the hand of George Washington is
   the transcription of a hymn. [1] Thomas Jefferson and John Adams were
   warmly interested in hymns. In their correspondence, after they had
   retired from Washington, the two old chieftains carried on a discussion
   of hymnody. They seemed to agree upon the Psalms as the greatest of all
   lyrical poetry. In a letter of advice to young Isaac Englebrecht,
   Jefferson transcribed Tate and Brady's version of the fifteenth Psalm,
   "knowing," he says, "nothing more moral, more sublime, more worthy of
   your preservation."

   Benjamin Franklin was particularly fond of the lyrics of Isaac Watts.
   The first book issued from Franklin's press in Philadelphia was an
   edition of Watts's "[5]Psalms and Hymns." To a friend, Mrs. Newsom,
   when she visited him during his last hours, he quoted several of the
   lyrics of Watts, "discoursing at length upon their sublimity." Joel
   Barlow, poet of the Revolution, and later minister to France, was a
   writer of hymns and editor of a notable American hymn-book. John Quincy
   Adams translated the whole Book of Psalms into English verse, besides
   writing the large number of hymns in his "Poems of Religion and
   Society."

   The hymn is so much interwoven in the fabric of our past and present
   that it seems gratuitous to mention instances of the use of hymnody in
   familiar life. One must leave to the imagination, and to intimate
   recollections, evaluation of the worth of the hymn as a force in
   strengthening ties of fellowship and of sanctity, in giving voice to
   the otherwise unuttered grief or desire, and in bearing to those in
   need of it consolation and hope and courage.

   One might go on with innumerable details indicating the influence of
   these lyrics in American life. For example, Julia Ward Howe's "Battle
   Hymn of the Republic," written in a dark hour of the Civil War, and
   spreading through the camps and marches like fire, was worth to the
   Northern cause possibly more than train-loads of corn and ammunition
   could have been in its place. Lincoln was so moved by it that he broke
   into tears at the public singing of it. Lee, on the other side, was
   finding in the old hymn, "How Firm a Foundation," something of strength
   and comfort to help him. When Abraham Lincoln died, the people
   throughout the North sang the hymns that he had found helpful in his
   life. Nor is it without significance that many thousands of persons
   sang together all over the land as memorials to Garfield and McKinley,
   and later to Roosevelt, and to Harding, the hymns that these men had
   loved.

   Such glimpses as the foregoing indicate that the small type of lyrical
   poetry called the hymn has had a good deal to do, first and last, with
   the ideas and emotions of the people of the continent.

   The same may be said of the hymns in English life. The first literature
   written on English soil is, so far as we know, a religious lyric,
   Caedmon's Hymn. The missionaries who went to England with St. Augustine
   marched in a procession, singing hymns, up the strand to where King
   Ethelbert sat waiting to receive them. The king gave them a home in
   Canterbury, which town they entered, according to Bede, singing a
   litany. St. Patrick and his followers approached the old druids and
   hostile chiefs singing hymns. Among the works of Bede was "A Book of
   Hymns in Divers Sorts of Meter and Rhythm." There are throngs of
   incidents in early English lore indicating the part of hymnody in the
   life of the people. Bede tells, for example, of the famous "Halleluiah
   victory" of Germanicus over the Saxons and Picts wherein by a
   "universal shouting of Halleluiah" they put the enemy to rout. King
   Alfred was so attached to his hymn-book that he would go nowhere, not
   even hunting, without it. Henry VIII, Elizabeth, Mary Stuart, and James
   I were authors of hymns. So we may glance down over the hymns of the
   Wesleys and the hymns of the Oxford Movement and on down to the singing
   of "O God Our Help in Ages Past" by the English at the burial of their
   Unknown Soldier at the close of the World War.

   An indication of the influence of the hymn in Scottish life may be
   found in Burns's portrayal in "The Cotter's Saturday Night"; and Robert
   Burns knew the heart of Scotland.


   They chant their artless notes in simple guise;

   They tune their hearts, by far the noblest aim;

   Perhaps "Dundee's" wild warbling measures rise,

   Or Plaintive "Martyrs," worthy of the name;

   Or noble "Elgin" beets the heavenward flame,

   The sweetest far of Scotia's holy lays. . . .

   From scenes like these old Scotia's grandeur springs

   That makes her loved at home, revered abroad.

   Hymnody constitutes a part, not only of English literature, but of all
   literature. Rich as the English language is in hymns, it can claim no
   preeminence or priority in the devotional lyric. There were hymns
   before there were hieroglyphics. Historically, the human race was up
   and singing before sunrise. Literature itself first appears coming up
   out of the old forests with priestly chants. Practically every
   literature seems to have had its beginning in hymnic song and chant.
   The first piece of French writing extant, except for a bit of
   tabulation, the "Sentiments de Strasbourg," is a hymn. Charlemagne,
   like Ambrose and Gregory and Alfred the Great, established schools for
   the teaching of hymn singing. The first trace of Greek literature is
   hymnic. The story of Tyrtaeus, whether one reads it as myth or fact,
   gives a glimpse of the early Grecian hymn, and its lyric power to
   awaken and transfigure popular sentiment. The Athenians, bidden by the
   oracle to send a leader to the Spartans, sent in guile, as the one man
   of Athens likely to be of least service to the rival city, Tyrtaeus, a
   crippled school-teacher. But their guile misled them: the crippled
   school-teacher taught the Spartans and their children hymns of the gods
   and songs of human duty and destiny which so filled their minds with
   just ideas and fired their souls with brave and noble purpose as to
   reform the state of Sparta.

   The type reached a marvelous state of perfection early in the life of
   the Hebrew people. Their greatest artistic expression was their lyrics
   of religion. And they sang them with a will. The hymn singing of Mount
   Zion could be heard twelve miles away. Their collections of psalms,
   begun in their early recorded life, enjoy to-day an enormous popular
   favor even translated into modern languages, and they have been an
   incalculably powerful influence in forming the taste and ideals of the
   Western nations. "With a psalm," says Prothero, in his "Psalms in Human
   Life," "we are baptized, married, and buried." In this connection he
   quotes Heine as saying that in the Book of Psalms are collected the
   "sunrise and sunset, birth and death, promise and fulfillment--the
   whole drama of humanity." These early hymns have strangely permeated
   European civilized life since Christianity brought them into Europe.
   To-day the English-speaking school-boy who does not know by heart some
   of this ancient hymnic poetry is rightly considered ignorant and
   neglected.

   The early Christian centuries echo with Greek and Latin hymns. Medieval
   literature comes to its flower in its religious songs. Some of them are
   vigorously alive to-day. The "Dies Irae" is an example; Philip Schaff
   thought it beyond doubt the greatest song in the world. Lockhart says
   that Sir Walter Scott was murmuring its lines as he lay dying. Dr.
   Samuel Johnson could never repeat it, Mrs. Thrale says, without tears.
   This medieval hymn has been published, up to 1910, in more than 137
   modern English translations. Few other productions of the Latin
   language have seen so many published English renderings.

   If hymnody flourished in medieval Latin, it has found even more genial
   and fertile soil in the Teutonic languages. The German hymn is a form
   of poetry deeply rooted in popular favor, noble in its aim, and soundly
   artistic within its scope.

   It is true that only in late years has the indigenous religious lyric
   reached the established place in English poetry that it holds in the
   German, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew literatures. It had to struggle
   against the strongly intrenched "Psalms in Meter" and to overcome some
   very strong and peculiar prejudices before it came fully to its own.
   Yet from the time that English literature, like most other literatures,
   opens its story with a hymn, the type of poem has held its place and
   performed its incalculably useful service in English life and
   literature.

   A book of hymns issued in 1549, and revised and added to, saw by 1828
   more than six hundred editions. This book, entitled originally
   "Certayne Psalms chosen out of the Ebrewe by Thomas Sternhold," later
   known as "Sternhold and Hopkins," far surpassed in circulation all
   other English books except the Bible and the Prayer-Book. The
   translation, made conjointly by thirty American scholars, of the Psalms
   from Hebrew into verse--"The Bay Psalm Book," Cambridge, Massachusetts,
   1640--was reprinted in 1647 and saw at least twenty printings in
   England and six in Scotland. These hymns, however, were translations.
   As has been said, English literature was late in producing its own
   indigenous hymnody. The English people were long content with Latin
   hymns and the various translations of the Hebrew hymnody. But since the
   eighteenth century the writing and appreciation of hymns has grown till
   the type has become more and more an element of our poetic wealth. Its
   recognition as a province of the great poetry of the language was for
   natural reasons slow in coming; but it has come.

   Yet to call the hymn poetry is to many minds a new and bold assumption.
   That this expression of the human spirit has no right to the name of
   literature is a judgment not confined entirely to persons of a light
   way of thinking. Certain graver critics, even as they point out that
   the crowning glory of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries was their
   great, surging hymns, seem to be unaware of the rich strain of
   religious lyrical poetry in our literature to-day. There is an
   inclination to fence in what is called "literary lyrics" as if to fence
   out "singing lyrics." Now there is, of course, a distinction between
   poems meant to be sung and poems written in the pattern of lyrical
   poetry but never meant to be sung; but the terminology which classes
   one kind as literary, thereby implying that the other kind is not of
   the realm of literature, is inaccurate and unhappy. There may be no
   objection to saying that lyric poetry not meant to be sung is
   literature, but objection there is to saying that verses meant to be
   sung--the true lyrics of the language--are not literature. The
   religious lyric belongs to the province of poetry none the less because
   it sets itself to music and is taken up and sung by most of the people.
   The literature of the people is not an alien thing, apart from them; it
   is of course expressed at first by a few elect spokesmen, but after all
   it is of and for the many. It cannot be deemed estranged and aloof. If
   to be literary is to be cabined, cribbed, apart from the common mind
   and heart of the age, the hymn is not literary. But literature is not
   thus penned up away from the people. It springs forth from the general
   consciousness as a spring of water issues from the hillside. And it is
   assigned to its place by the social mind. A single wave of popular
   favor will not and should not establish any form of expression as
   literature; but a general and continuous acceptance will establish it.
   A general and continuous acceptance the hymn has had. True, the fact
   may indicate to some persons nothing more than an innate religiosity in
   the Anglo-Saxon mind. However that may be, and however we may limit the
   term "literature," the English-speaking people do produce largely, read
   widely, and love profoundly a form of expression called the hymn. If
   the form does in one way or another sing itself into the consciousness
   of most people, it may justly be termed lyrical. And if, expressing
   grave and noble sentiment in a style of marked chasteness and decorum,
   it is gratifying to the people generally at their more earnest and most
   elevated moments, there is little gain in arguing that it is not
   literature.

   Still there remains something of a critical tradition that while the
   hymn in Greek, Latin, and German is excellent poetry, it is in English
   a poor and stunted thing. This judgment was virtually true when Addison
   stated it and himself wrote three good hymns as his contribution to
   modern English hymnody. It was less true when Johnson repeated the
   statement. Addison and Johnson themselves differed diametrically in
   their opinions as to hymnody. Devoted as Addison was to the literature
   and lore of Greece and Rome, he nevertheless held, in "The Spectator,"
   that the greatest lyrical poetry of ancient times was that of the
   Psalms. He urged that English poets should turn their efforts more to
   hymnody. He says:

     Most of the works of the pagan poets were either direct hymns to
     their deities or tended indirectly to the celebration of their
     respective attributes and perfections. Those who are acquainted with
     the works of Greek and Latin poets which are still extant will upon
     reflection find this observation so true that I shall not enlarge
     upon it. One would wonder that more of our Christian poets have not
     turned their thoughts this way, especially if we consider that our
     idea of the Supreme Being is not only infinitely more great and
     noble than what could possibly enter into the heart of a heathen,
     but filled with everything that can raise the imagination and give
     an opportunity for the sublimest thoughts and conceptions.

   Johnson, to the contrary, held that it was impossible to write good
   hymnody. He says in his "Life of Waller":

     It has been the frequent lamentation of good men that verse has been
     too little applied to the purposes of worship, and many attempts
     have been made to animate devotion by pious poetry; that they have
     very seldom attained their end is sufficiently known, and it may not
     be improper to inquire why they have miscarried. Let no pious ear be
     offended if I advance, in opposition to many authorities, that
     poetical devotion cannot often please. The doctrines of religion may
     indeed be defined in a didactic poem; and he who has the happy power
     of arguing in verse, will not lose it because his subject is sacred.
     A poet may describe the beauty and grandeur of nature, the flowers
     of the spring, and the harvests of autumn, the vicissitudes of the
     tide, and the revolutions of the sky, and praise his Maker in lines
     which no reader shall lay aside. The subject of the disputation is
     not piety, but the motives to piety; that of the description is not
     God, but the works of God. Contemplative piety, or the intercourse
     between God and the human soul, cannot be poetical. Man admitted to
     implore the mercy of his Creator, and plead the merits of his
     Redeemer, is already in a higher state than poetry can confer.

   The true path lies somewhere between these extremes. We know that
   Addison was out of the path if he meant that Poetry must sit in a pew
   or wear a cowl in order to be in the service and praise of God. All
   good verses following after truth and beauty are in the service and
   honor of God. Addison seems to imply that hymns exclusively are
   "sacred" and the rest of poetry "profane." The world knows better now
   than to say that all outside the temple gate is profane. Who will say
   that "Rescue the Perishing" is more to the glory of God than "Lycidas"?
   But however Addison may argue over this point, he proves very
   splendidly part of his contention, that the English language has not
   enough hymns; he wrote two hymns which still supply an insistent want.
   He shows that Johnson is wrong, by the best of proof, by doing
   eminently well what Johnson argued could not be done at all. In the
   hymn beginning, "The spacious firmament on high," he does "make
   contemplative piety poetical." And in the hymn, "When All Thy Mercies,
   O My God," he illustrates how that "poetical" and that "thanksgiving"
   may be even best in the form of poetry. The Psalms are devoted to
   "faith, thanksgiving, repentance, and supplication," and they are
   poetical. It is possible to write good hymns; though it is difficult,
   and comparatively few have done it.

   "Scarcely any one of us ever judges our hymns fairly," said Matthew
   Arnold in his Oxford lectures on Celtic literature. And in the same
   paragraph, as if to exemplify this saying, he goes on to say that "so
   far as poetry is concerned, while [6]The Golden Treasury' is a monument
   of a nation's poetic strength, the Book of Praise' [Sir Roundell
   Palmer's collection of hymns] is a monument to a nation's weakness."

   Arnold was here speaking at the climax of his thesis that the
   Anglo-Saxon spirit is unlawfully married to the Semitic spirit, being
   divorced from the Indo-European, and specifically, the poetic Celtic
   spirit.

     And [he says] if--whereas the Semitic genius places its highest
     spiritual life in the religious sentiment, and makes that the basis
     of its poetry--the Indo-European genius places its highest spiritual
     life in the imaginative reason, and makes that the basis of its
     poetry, we are none the better for wanting the perception to discern
     a natural law, which is, after all, like every natural law,
     irresistible; we are none the better for trying to make ourselves
     Semitic, when nature has made us Indo-European, and to shift the
     basis of our poetry. We may mean well; all manner of good may follow
     us on the way we go; but we are not on our right road, the road we
     must in the end follow.

   That, he says, is why our hymns betray a false tendency and "poetry
   deserts us in our hymns." The great Latin hymns but show that when
   Indo-Europeans do make religious sentiment the basis of their poetry
   they must do it in the language that is not alive. "The moment it
   [poetry] speaks in a living language, and makes itself the organ of the
   religious sentiment only, as in the German and English hymns, it
   betrays weakness;--the weakness of false tendency."

   The dictum of Arnold about the monuments of strength has been received
   with more seriousness than it ever deserved. Is it true that all
   English poetry which has the religious sentiment as its basis is
   outworn Hebraism into which the English genius has fallen? There is no
   more reason for saying that English poetry based on the religious
   sentiment is alien than for saying that English poetry based on any
   other profound emotion of the heart is alien. Furthermore, is the
   Celtic genius alien to lyrics expressive of the religious sentiment?
   Among all modern hymn-singers the Welsh seem to be the most
   enthusiastic; and there are no other such inveterate psalm-singers as
   the Scotch. The old Irish helped to civilize Germany and England with
   their hymns.

   As for the Latin hymns of the Middle Ages, those of Bernard of Cluny
   and Bernard of Clairvaux and St. Francis of Assisi, Thomas Aquinas,
   Abelard, and the others were surely not written in a dead language.
   Latin was not a dead language in Milton's time. Hymnody is alien to no
   language and no people except to those lacking religious sentiment and
   poetic impulse.

   Despite the growing richness and varied excellence of the hymn-book,
   the old critical estimates of it, made long ago when the hymn as native
   English poetry had not come into its own, are still repeated by many
   critics. "The Cambridge History of American Literature," for example,
   contains a chapter by Professor Percy H. Boynton headed "Patriotic
   Songs and Hymns." The reader cannot be sure from the title whether or
   not the discussion of hymns is limited merely to patriotic hymns. He
   would suppose that it is so limited when he finds that nearly as much
   space is given to "Yankee Doodle" alone as to the whole subject of
   American hymns. But he finds less than three pages devoted to hymnody.
   And as he reads on he is likely to feel that it would have been as well
   if even less had been said. For the discussion is uncritical and
   unfair. One could hardly write three pages and call it, without
   straining the meaning of words, "history" of American hymnody; the hymn
   is too prevalent and too important. It is as Edmund Clarence Stedman
   said, in his "Poets of America," the "kind of verse which is, of all,
   most common and indispensable." But even the historian's three pages
   are not devoted to hymnody; they are given over to a strident
   discussion of what is not hymnody at all, but doggerel about which few
   persons would need instruction, or about which thoughtful persons would
   hardly need to argue. Scattered through the pages are such terms as
   "bathos," "mortuary muse," "banalities of evangelistic song,"
   "sentimental ornateness," "tawdry sentimentalism." This is indeed fair
   invective against the tawdry sentimentalism and the like which
   disfigure many compositions that pass as hymns, but beside the point
   entirely as regards the true hymn. The things attacked are not American
   hymnody.

   We do not condemn all love-songs because there are inane and silly
   ones. There are good and beautiful love-songs quite different from
   current trash. There are plenty of medieval religious songs unspeakably
   maudlin and ridiculous. But that does not condemn medieval hymnody. One
   must distinguish. These lines from an anonymous hymn of the Middle
   Ages,


   O esca vermorum! O missa pulveris!

   O ros! O vanitas! Cur extolleris?

   are not gracious and elevating poetry; nor are the following lines from
   old English times:


   Matthew, Mark, and Luke and John, I beg,

   The devil has tied up a knot in my leg,

   Crosses three we make to ease us,

   Two for the robbers and one for Christ Jesus.

   The famous Latin hymn "Gloria, Laus et Honor" has a stanza translated
   by John Mason Neale:


   Be thou, Lord, the rider,

   And we the little ass;

   That to God's holy city

   Together we may pass.

   It would hardly be fair to condemn the hymnody of the past by setting
   up these as fair examples of the hymnody, and hurling indiscriminate
   expletives at the whole.

   One must of course admit that there has been published very solemnly
   much weak and ridiculous hymnic verse; the appeal of a great hymn is so
   general, and its clarity and simplicity make it appear so easy to do,
   that many persons attempt to write hymns who cannot write well at all,
   much less write in this very difficult form. The failures are so many
   and so obvious that these critics forget the splendidly successful
   efforts that make up the hymn-book.

   There is to be distinguished from all banalities a volume of true elect
   American hymns--poems of impeccable taste and undeniable power. The
   standard set by such hymnists as Timothy Dwight, John Quincy Adams,
   Oliver Wendell Holmes, William Cullen Bryant, John Greenleaf Whittier,
   James Russell Lowell, Phoebe Cary, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Sidney
   Lanier, Phillips Brooks, Richard Watson Gilder, and John Hay is high.
   And though the standard is high, it is reached by a sufficient number
   to make a book of rich and beautiful religious song.

   In his "English Lyrical Poetry," [2] for further example of thoughtless
   criticisms, Professor Edward Bliss Reed adopts a sportive attitude when
   he comes to consider the hymn--if it may be called considering this
   important province of poetry merely to poke irrelevant fun at Isaac
   Watts by quoting Dr. Johnson's remark about Watts's innocence of life.

   Isaac Watts was in fact a courageous, noble man, a classical scholar,
   and a lyrical poet of frequent loftiness and delicacy. Dr. Johnson says
   in his short "Life of Watts," "Happy will be the reader whose mind is
   disposed by his verse or his prose to imitate him in all but his
   Non-Conformity." And further--these are the Great Lexicographer's words
   for the modern critic--"Every man acquainted with the common principles
   of human action will look with veneration on the man." Isaac Watts's
   hymns have stood severer tests than that of light ridicule. Watts
   displays at the same time the gentleness of a saint with the rugged
   strength of a trail-blazing pioneer. In the age of conformity he
   asserted a stanch intellectual and religious independence. Professor
   Saintsbury calls him "a belated metaphysical." But rather, instead of
   being a drowsy follower to bed of Donne and Herrick, he was up early in
   a new morning, kindling fires for Cowper and Wesley, Burke and Adams,
   Burns and Wordsworth. Watts is an important figure in English literary
   history. He helped to make possible the political, social, and
   religious advance of the age following his, and the romantic movement
   in English literature owes him no uncertain debt.

   In his volume, "The English Lyric," Professor Felix E. Schelling
   virtually disposes of the hymn with the remark that we may or may not
   "accept" certain hymns, but we do not have to read them. That is
   readily granted--unless of course one wishes to know them or to write
   just criticism about them. If, however, more people do read them and
   value them than read any other kind of poetry; if noble thinking in
   seemly diction and ringing cadence finds a lasting and general favor,
   so much so that, for whatever reason they may have, people get it by
   heart and sing it from one generation to another; it would seem to be
   literature.

   Although the hymn, of all forms of verse, comes most readily to the
   apprehension and affection of people, it seems in the main to come most
   reluctantly from the pen of poets. Even the genius of William
   Cowper--his deep religious fervor, his exquisite good taste, his
   patience, and his extraordinary poetical gift--did not avail to bring
   forth more than fifty lines of what the hymn-book to-day pronounces
   great hymnody.

   One is especially impressed with the difficulty of writing good hymns
   when one considers that Charles Wesley, whom Julian in his great
   [7]Dictionary calls "perhaps the greatest hymnist of all ages," and who
   wrote about sixty-five hundred hymns, is represented in the hymn-book
   by an average of only twenty songs. Time and the hymn-books seem to be
   lessening this figure to about ten, including "Jesus, Lover of My
   Soul"; "O for a Thousand Tongues to Sing"; "Before Jehovah's Awful
   Throne"; "Hark! the Herald Angels Sing"; "Christ, Whose Glory Fills the
   Skies"; "Love Divine, All Love Excelling"; "Soldiers of Christ, Arise";
   and "Come, O Thou Traveller Unknown." To have written ten hymns, or
   even two, that are borne near to the heart of English-speaking peoples
   throughout the world is of course to be still a power; yet for the
   greatest hymn-writer of the world to have reached the standard, say,
   only fifty times out of sixty-five hundred, indicates an exacting test.

   Isaac Watts, if only as the author of "O God Our Help in Ages Past"
   alone, would be no inglorious poet; yet the hymn-book seems very severe
   in choosing but eight or ten of the more than six hundred published by
   "the great Doctor Watts."

   Samuel Medley is remembered by "O Could I Speak the Matchless Worth,"
   though he published 229 other hymns; George Matheson, by "O Love That
   Wilt Not Let Me Go," though he wrote a whole volume of hymns. The
   author of "Fight the Good Fight" wrote three hundred other hymns. Ray
   Palmer, author of "My Faith Looks up to Thee," wrote two volumes of
   hymns. The hymn-book has chosen four out of the 127 hymns published by
   Bishop Wordsworth; this is a large percentage. William Wordsworth wrote
   and published a single hymn, "The Laborer's Noonday Hymn." But it was
   not successful; few of the books have included it. John Newton wrote
   many hymns for the Olney book; but the really great hymnody called
   forth by his extraordinary vigor, patience, and religious fervor is
   comprised in some threescore lines of the hymn-book.

   Rudyard Kipling is the author of but one good hymn, one, however, which
   seems to belong among the fifty best of the language. The present
   laureate of England, who is a distinguished hymnologist, being an
   editor and in part author of a hymn-book, the "Yattendon Hymnal," has
   two or three lyrics which the hymnal may or may not accept as passably
   good. Still, of the many hymns written so far by Mr. Bridges, not one
   possesses that surging force and grace of life which bespeaks a sure
   survival among the elect lyrics.

   "A good hymn," said Alfred Tennyson, "is the most difficult thing in
   the world to write." It was not until his eighty-first year that he
   himself achieved his single great hymn. He handed to his son, on their
   return one afternoon from a sail across the bay, a piece of paper
   containing a lyric of sixteen lines.

   "That," said the son when he read it, "is the crown of your life's
   work!"

   The old poet gave explicit directions that it should be put at the end
   of all editions of his poems; and this stately and tender lyric,
   "Crossing the Bar," was sung a little later at the laureate's funeral
   in Westminster Abbey. Since that time it has taken its place, for the
   present day at least, among the small group of English hymns commonly
   sung at the burial of the dead. In some of the hymn-books Tennyson is
   represented also by certain stanzas from "In Memoriam," which, however,
   while being included in more and more of the books, do not approach his
   calmly triumphant death-song.

   It is true that Spenser, Shakspere, Milton, Wordsworth, Tennyson, and
   Browning are, except for one piece by Milton, one by Wordsworth, and
   two by Tennyson, not in the hymn-book. But it does not follow, as some
   are quick to assume, that all good poetry is otherwise shut out. That
   at the funeral of Robert Browning in Westminster Abbey England went
   back to Isaac Watts for a fitting hymn to sing does not argue either
   that Browning was not a glorious poet or that Watts's hymn was not both
   majestic and lovely enough to sing for any poet dead. "O God Our Help
   in Ages Past," as a lyrical poem, seems to have about it a finality
   that any perfect piece of art must have. It is no matter that Shakspere
   did not write it. If Shakspere and Browning were not inclined or gifted
   to write hymns, or if Byron and Shelley and Tennyson were not
   sonneteers, the fact is not disquieting; they merely did not, for
   reasons easily ascertained, labor within this narrow scope. For the
   scope is narrow. The hymn is subject to all the limitations of other
   lyric poetry and to peculiarly rigid restrictions of its own. And one
   must admit that glowing perfection is rare here as elsewhere. All this
   being so, it is still a sober assertion that some of the English hymnic
   verse reaches a poetic height not often reached in our literature at
   all.

   There are clear reasons why but little that the few major poets wrote
   is admitted into the hymn-book. Why they did not write good hymns is
   another question. Milton, having the supreme gift of poetry and a
   profoundly religious nature, and being, perhaps, as Professor William
   P. Trent says, the best single character of the English race, might
   have been expected to write the greatest hymns. He had a warm interest
   in hymns as had his father before him, who of himself has a dim
   immortality in the hymn-book as the author of the tunes "Norwich" and
   "York." John Milton did try his hand at hymns; but he is remembered in
   the hymn-book by but five stanzas, the psalm paraphrase, "Let Us with a
   Gladsome Mind." The morning hymn in the fifth book of "[8]Paradise
   Lost," beginning with line 138, is not strictly hymnal; the blank
   verse, the long periodic structure, the elaboration of figure, and the
   localization all put it beyond the pale of the hymn-book.

   The hymn is a quite definite and distinct type of poetry. Its
   boundaries as regards both form and content are plainly and narrowly
   laid down. It is of all types of literature perhaps the most rigorously
   limited. Merely as a lyric it would of course have narrow limitations;
   as a religious lyric its limitations are multiplied; but in that it
   must be the medium of concerted social thought and feeling on the
   gravest matters, and yet simple enough in form to be sung chorally by
   an assemblage not assumed to have any special choral practice or skill,
   it is very much more limited. The hymn must be a lyrical poem, simple
   of form, easy and smooth of movement; its ideas must be direct,
   unified, immediately apparent; its manner must have the decorum and
   gravity befitting public worship.

   The intricate form, for example, of Milton's "Hymn on the Nativity"
   would bar it from the book were it acceptable in every other respect.
   For its stanzas are long and complex. The hymn stanza must be short
   enough to fit a simple musical setting, and invariably regular. A
   sonnet, were it ideal otherwise, could hardly find its way into the
   hymn-book; it cannot be divided into four-, or three-, or five-line
   stanzas. Even if it had twelve or sixteen lines so that it could be
   divided into quatrains to fit a simple musical scheme, its pentameter
   line would still be a difficulty. Of the scores of superb religious
   sonnets there is none in any hymn-book.

   The severity of the demand for simple form is apparent at a glance
   through the hymnal. The simplest of all poetic forms, the form most
   easily read and retained in the memory, is the ballad stanza, or what
   the hymn-book calls common meter. It is the form of "Sir Patrick Spens"
   and "Robin Hood." Wordsworth and Coleridge went back to it in "Lucy
   Gray" and "The Ancient Mariner." It is a four-line stanza, the first
   and third lines, tetrameter, usually riming; the second and fourth,
   trimeter, always riming. An example is Cowper's


   God moves in a mysterious way,

   His wonders to perform;

   He plants his footsteps in the sea,

   And rides upon the storm.

   There are more hymns in common meter than in any other measure. As this
   is the simplest stanza form, so is its tetrameter the simplest line
   measure for sustained and dignified verse. There are more four-measure
   lines in the hymn-book than all other lines combined.

   Next to common meter the favorite stanza form is long meter, four
   tetrameter lines. Oliver Wendell Holmes's hymn beginning,


   Lord of all being, throned afar,

   Thy glory flames from sun and star;

   Center and source of every sphere,

   Yet to each loving heart how near,

   is in long meter. Short meter is a stanza of four lines, the third
   tetrameter, the others trimeter.


   A few more storms shall beat

   On this wild rocky shore;

   And we shall be where tempests cease,

   And surges swell no more.

   The first and third lines may rime; the second and last must rime. The
   third line, running out longer than the others, does not demand the
   rime sound, but the final line of the stanza does require a closing
   rime. Stanzas made up of trimeter lines alone are rarely found. The
   trimeter verse is too short and monotonous. Pentameter, on the other
   hand, which is by far the favorite line in English poetry generally, is
   rare in the hymn. Hexameter is exceptionally rare. It seems that
   practically the line longer than four feet is too much for the eye,
   reading at a glance--since it must watch the music-notes also--to catch
   at once. And even the few hymns written in lines longer than four feet
   tend to fall into easy rhythmic division, and are usually made into
   conventional hymn length by the music. The pentameter "Abide with Me"
   is thus subdivided by its familiar musical setting, "Eventide." On the
   other hand, if the poet has made the line too short, the music
   lengthens it. "Nearer, My God, to Thee" is written in dimeter and
   trimeter, but the tune really lengthens the verse into common meter.
   The iambic is far the most prevalent foot in the hymnal verse as in
   English verse generally.

   Conformity to simple measure is but one of the restraints that the
   hymn-book places upon the poet; it enjoins a sure simplicity of ideas,
   as well as of form. The good hymn is arrow-like in moving to its mark;
   its images, however brilliantly they may flash and gleam, must not--any
   more than the point and feather of an arrow--retard or deflect the
   movement. A stanza of Sarah Fowler Adams's famous hymn will illustrate
   this. It suited the purpose of the poem to tell--as a lyric may
   tell--the story in Genesis 28:10-19, of Jacob at Beth-el.

   After the successful conspiracy to deceive his dying father who was
   blind, and to cheat his brother Esau out of his rightful property,
   Jacob fled for his life into a strange country.

     And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba, and went toward Haran. And he
     lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because
     the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place and put
     them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep. And he
     dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it
     reached to heaven; and behold the angels of God ascending and
     descending on it. . . . And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he
     said, Surely the Lord is in this place; and I knew it not. And he
     was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none other
     but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. And Jacob rose
     up early in the morning and took the stone that he had put for his
     pillows, and set it up for a pillar and poured oil upon the top of
     it. And he called the name of that place Beth-el.

   This passage furnishes a splendid theme for hymnody, and a number of
   good hymns are based upon it, such, for example, as that of [9]Madame
   Guyon, translated from the French by William Cowper. It begins:


   My Lord, how full of sweet content,

   I pass my years of banishment!

   Where'er I dwell, I dwell with thee,

   In Heaven, in earth, or on the sea.


   To me remains nor place nor time;

   My country is in every clime:

   I can be calm and free from care

   On any shore, since God is there.

   But notice with what vividness of detail "Nearer, My God, to Thee"
   gives the picture as Madame Guyon's hymn does not. Still Mrs. Adams
   maintains a true lyric economy of words. Much might have been said
   about Jacob's homesickness, his guilty conscience, his fear of night
   and enemies, his hunger and cold, and so on through the story, the
   ladder, the angels, and all. But notice the swiftness and directness of
   the hymn narrative, and the sweep of its style:


   Nearer, my God, to thee!

   Nearer to thee,

   E'en though it be a cross

   That raiseth me;

   Still all my song shall be,

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!


   Though like a wanderer,

   The sun gone down,

   Darkness be over me,

   My rest a stone,

   Yet in my dreams I'd be

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!


   There let the way appear,

   Steps unto heaven;

   All that thou sendest me,

   In mercy given;

   Angels to beckon me

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!


   Then, with my waking thoughts

   Bright with thy praise,

   Out of my stony griefs

   Bethel I raise;

   So by my woes to be

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!


   Or, if on joyful wing,

   Cleaving the sky,

   Sun, moon, and stars forgot,

   Upwards I fly,

   Still all my song shall be,

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!

   These lines might, by the way, be held up as a touchstone of hymnody.
   When one begins to measure other poems by the qualities of this
   one--its brevity, its simplicity, its vivid imagery, its strong feeling
   under perfect control, its general artistic integrity--one finds what a
   rare and fine thing a perfect hymn is.

   The essential directness of style is evident in the hymnal attitude
   toward external nature. The hymn poet may pass through gardens and
   pleasant fields, but he must not loiter there. In the more open fields
   of poesy he may wander as he likes, but in the aisle of the hymn he
   must go straightly. The journeying soul may see


   Sweet prospects, sweet birds, and sweet flowers,

   but the end of the journey, not they, is the point. Like Bunyan's
   [10]Pilgrim, he may delight in scenes of natural beauty, but at the
   same time he must be on his way. The twenty-third Psalm deals with
   nature ideally from the hymnal point of view. The poem, as it is
   rendered in the King James version, is essentially, in manner, idea,
   and spirit, a model hymn, except for the fact that it has not rime and
   meter for the hymn music; translation as it is, unmetrical as it is, it
   is yet perhaps the single most popular English poem. It pictures vivid
   and unforgettable scenes of nature; but these scenes are not there
   merely because they are beautiful. The idea of the lyric does not
   wander after them; they accompany and serve the idea. The point of the
   poem is not green pastures, still water, and shadowed valley, but the
   care of the good Shepherd.

   The frequent glimpses of natural scenery in the hymn are often no less
   vivid and appealing because they are brief. Descriptions of one or two
   lines stamp themselves strangely on the memory. The curious critical
   notion that the hymn must be dun-colored and tame of spirit can be
   traced back to Dr. Johnson's famous and false pronouncement about
   devotional poetry. "The paucity of its topics," he said, "enforces
   perpetual repetition, and the sanctity of its matter rejects the
   ornaments of figurative diction." The English hymn was not then so
   strong to refute this as it is now, but the Hebrew was, and the Latin.
   Still this charge was met by Watts, in the preface to his "Hymns and
   Spiritual Songs," 1707, long before Johnson made it. "Have they forgot,
   or were they never told that many parts of the Old Testament were
   verse? and the figures are stronger and the metaphors bolder and the
   images more surprising and strange than ever I read in any profane
   writer?"

   Indeed the best hymns are boldest in figure. So far from being
   undesirable, poetic vigor and color are necessary to great hymns; only
   this liveliness must not be what Herrick called "unbaptized." The hymn
   that figured night as


   That Ethiop queen with jewels in her hair

   did not long survive. A hymn might conceivably point a moral by a
   Cleopatra or more easily by a Queen of Sheba, but it may not ask the
   saints to celebrate her charms, or to give her more than passing note.
   The hymn-book is not unreasonable in these restrictions. It merely
   makes the demand of good art that the figures be congruous. It is but
   true to good art and good sense in excluding ideas and modes of
   expression alien to its spirit and purpose. These restrictions, though
   reasonable, are severely narrow.

   The popular nature of the hymn demands a peculiar simplicity of form;
   its artistic nature demands the proper harmony and intensity of lyric
   emotion; its religious nature demands of it, as an act of public
   worship, an inflexible directness and dignity of style. For example,
   Herrick's "Litany to the Holy Spirit" ignores the last rule and thus
   fails to keep its opening promise of being an immortal hymn. The
   touching picture of the dying Christian is marred by the line,


   When the house doth sigh and weep

   in the wind. Aside from its "pathetic fallacy," the line goes too far
   in particularization. The hymn has no interest in the peculiarities of
   a poet's house, or in the sounds about it, unless by some means these
   rise into the range of general grave concern. But even if there were
   some relation that would draw the assembly to sing of Herrick's house,
   there is yet a worse fault with the poem, which precludes any
   possibility of its being in the hymn-book.


   In the houre of my distresse,

   When temptations me oppresse,

   And when I my sins confesse,

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When I lie within my bed,

   Sick in heart, and sick in head,

   And with doubts discomforted,

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the house doth sigh and weep,

   And the world is drown'd in sleep,

   Yet mine eyes the watch do keep;

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the artlesse Doctor sees

   No one hope but of his Fees,

   And his skill runs on the lees,

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When his potion and his Pill,

   Has, or none, or little skill,

   Meet for nothing, but to kill,

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the passing-bell doth tole,

   And the furies in a shole

   Come to fright a parting soule,

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the tapers now burne blew,

   And the comforters are few,

   And the number more than true;

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the Priest his last hath praid,

   And I nod to what is said,

   'Cause my speech is now decaid;

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When (God knows) I'm tost about,

   Either with despair or doubt;

   Yet before the glasse be out,

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the tempter me pursu'th

   With the sins of all my youth,

   And halfe damns me with untruth;

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the flames and hellish cries

   Fright mine ears and fright mine eyes,

   And all terrors me surprise;

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!


   When the judgment is reveal'd,

   And that open'd which was seal'd,

   When to thee I have appeal'd;

   Sweet Spirit comfort me!

   The very effective first three stanzas would doubtless have been
   accepted and Herrick forgiven, if they were not logically incomplete
   without the impossible fourth and following stanzas. Objection to a
   doctor's potions would be no subject for the assembled faithful to
   incorporate into song. The hymn-book has no time for the incongruous or
   trifling. It is straightaway and brief in manner, for it must be about
   its earnest business.

   "A truly spiritual taste," said John Billinsby in his edition of D.
   Burgess's "Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs," London, 1714, "will
   keep well disposed minds so intent upon the weight and seriousness of
   the matter as not to leave them at Leisure for little Impertinences of
   Criticism upon the Phrase and Dress; or the exactness of Measure and
   Rhyme in these sacred composures." True enough; but the poet or
   poetaster must not presume upon any self-imposed title of sacredness.
   The truly spiritual taste and the well disposed minds that after all
   decide what shall make up the hymn-book have no use for little
   impertinences of criticism; but this constant critical judgment knows,
   given time enough, precisely what is fitting in a hymn and what is not;
   and it will brook no departure from its standard. There is an Avernus
   for hymns, and the descent thereto is easy. The hymn-book has its
   standard and is very strict in upholding it. While there are notable
   differences of style and idea in the hymn-books of different periods,
   the variations from the standard are naturally much less than the
   variations of some other kinds of poetry from their standards.

   But it is interesting to find what a motley poetry has knocked at the
   door of the hymnal and once in a while, under the guise of "sacred
   composure," has found admittance--though not for long. Here are some
   lines, little better or worse than many of the translations that gained
   admittance for a time, from "The Bay Psalm Book":


   For thence he shall come for to judge

   All men both dead and quick

   I, in the Holy Ghost believe,

   In church that's Catholicke.

   Good Thomas Hopkins, of "Sternhold and Hopkins," lived in stormy,
   perilous times. Like St. Peter, he sometimes showed the impatience
   which is characteristic of the military mind.


   Why dost thou draw thy hand aback,

   And hide it in thy Lappe?

   O pluck it out, and be not slack

   To give thy foes a rappe!

   In Reeve's "Spiritual Hymns" of the latter seventeenth century, No. 107
   attributes to Deity a curious and surprising argument on the unity of
   the church.


   I am no Bigamist,

   I have no Concubines;

   It's only one Church I admit,

   One child; I have no twins.

   Hymn 111 of the same book is addressed to the church.


   Our hearts are swifter than our Charets;

   We'll both conspire from our places:

   Thou here, and I from lofty Garrets,

   We'll lift this world off its Basis.

   There was a song in an old American hymn-book which was neighborly and
   frank, but a shade too peremptory. "Come go with us," it says,


   But if you will refuse us,

   We bid you all farewell;

   We're on the road to Canaan,

   You on the road to hell.

   The best hymns, indeed, are notable for boldness and animation of
   style, and always of course under artistic control. The single
   composition that would probably be named by more people, high and low,
   urbane and rustic, religious and non-religious, as the best hymn in the
   language, "Nearer, My God, to Thee," may be taken as a pattern for good
   hymn verse. As for life and spirit, not Byron nor Shelley ever wrote
   more exultant lines than these:


   Or, if on joyful wing,

   Cleaving the sky,

   Sun, moon and stars forgot,

   Upwards I fly.

   Many of the modern as well as medieval and ancient hymns are all but
   too bold. Persons of milder temperament object to some of the old
   favorites as being vigorous to the extent of violence. A few lines of a
   famous hymn of the eighteenth century, Cowper's


   There is a fountain filled with blood,

   Drawn from Immanuel's veins;

   And sinners plunged beneath that flood,

   Lose all their guilty stains,

   are enough to show that excessive mildness is not an inherent trait of
   the hymn as a literary type. One can hear the stalwart poetry of
   medieval hymns even without knowing Latin.


   Dies irae, dies illa,

   Solvet saeclum in favilla,

   Teste David cum Sibylla.


   Tuba mirum spargens sonum

   Per sepulchra regionum,

   Coget omnes ante thronum.

   A well known hymn of the Old Testament, the one hundred and
   thirty-seventh Psalm, closes:

     Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against
     the stones.

   Whether the ancient pious sang this as fact or figure, modern taste may
   not at any rate tax it with lack of vigor. There is much of sweetness
   and gentleness in our hymnody, but there is tumultuous force in it
   also. There is no more reason for a hymn to be pallid and weak than for
   a person to be so. Within its scanty plot of ground the hymn can put
   forth as vivid purple and gold as grows in any field. These lines from
   Katherine Lee Bates's hymn--one which bids fair to enter the company of
   the world's great patriotic hymns--show that a hymn may be full of
   color:


   Oh beautiful for spacious skies,

   For amber waves of grain,

   For purple mountain majesties

   Above the fruited plain!

   A few passages further, based on the manifestations of nature we call
   the weather, show here that the hymn has force and color and variety to
   stir the heart and give flight to the imagination:


   Ye winds of night, your force combine;

   Without his high behest,

   Ye shall not in the mountain pine

   Disturb the sparrow's nest.

   Kirke White.


   Still, still, with thee, when purple morning breaketh,

   When the bird waketh, and the shadows flee;

   Fairer than morning, lovelier than daylight

   Dawns the sweet consciousness, I am with thee.


   O tell of his might, O sing of his grace

   Whose robe is the light, whose canopy space;

   His chariots of wrath the deep thunder-clouds form,

   And dark is his path on the wings of the storm.


   Ye faithful saints, fresh courage take,

   The clouds ye so much dread

   Are big with mercy, and shall break

   In blessings on your head.

   The following lines are not untypical of the vivid imagery and the
   lyric intensity of the English hymn-book:


   Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood

   Stand dressed in living green.


   Must I be carried to the skies

   On flowery beds of ease,

   While others fought to win the prize

   And sailed through bloody seas?


   I have seen him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps,

   They have builded him an altar in the evening dews and damps;

   I have read his righteous sentence in the dim and flaring lamps,

   His truth is marching on.


   Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise;

   Exalt thy towering head and lift thine eyes!

   See heaven its sparkling portals wide display,

   And break upon thee in a flood of day.


   Our years are like the shadows

   On sunny hills that lie,

   Or grasses in the meadows,

   That blossom but to die,

   A sleep, a dream, a story,

   By strangers quickly told,

   An unremaining glory

   Of things that soon are old.


   Lord of all being, throned afar,

   Thy glory flames from sun and star;

   Center and soul of every sphere,

   Yet to each loving heart how near.


   Majestic sweetness sits enthroned

   Upon the Saviour's brow.


   Lo, he comes with clouds descending.


   Jerusalem, the golden,

   With milk and honey blest.


   How gentle God's commands!

   How kind his precepts are!


   Hark! hark, my soul! angelic songs are swelling

   O'er earth's green fields, and ocean's wave-beat shore.

   There are many single lines of exquisite poetry which, because they are
   so familiar, fail immediately to arouse the imagination.


   In the cross of Christ I glory,

   Towering o'er the wrecks of time.

   A startlingly magnificent lyrical summary of history is the second
   line.

   "Rock of Ages, cleft for me," becomes a more strangely rich verse as
   one regards it longer. Its six words comprise a trope of the Eastern
   deserts of the wildly imaginative quality of the story of "Open,
   Sesame"; an epithet, "Rock of Ages," traced by scholars at least three
   thousand years back; and a cry of fervent piety from the heart of rural
   England.

   Following are other lines which may be considered illustrative of the
   imagery and feeling of the hymn-book. Some carry a feeling of elemental
   sadness, some of militant high resolve, some of sanguine praise and
   hope:


   Time like an ever-rolling stream

   Bears all her sons away.


   The tumult and the shouting dies;

   The captains and the kings depart;

   Still stands thine ancient sacrifice,

   An humble and a contrite heart.


   A few more years shall roll

   O'er these dark hills of time.


   From every stormy wind that blows,

   From every swelling tide of woes,

   There is a calm, a sure retreat.


   As pants the hart for cooling streams

   When heated in the chase.


   Thou wast their rock, their fortress, and their might,

   Thou, Lord, their Captain in the well-fought fight.


   His are the thousand sparkling rills

   That from a thousand fountains burst,

   And fill with music all the hills,

   And yet, he said, "I thirst."


   Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings.


   Hell's foundations tremble

   At the shout of praise.


   O, beautiful for patriot's dream

   That sees beyond the years

   Thine alabaster cities gleam,

   Undimmed by human tears.

   These scattered lines from the hymn-book indicate how this type of
   lyric, though it uses few and simple words and the simplest form of
   verse, and though it may appear excessively plain, can convey large
   ideas and stir deep emotions. And Poetry is to the discerning mind none
   the less gracious when, meetly clad, she moves as a ministering spirit
   among all sorts and conditions of men, bearing consolation and courage
   and amplitude of spirit, inspiring charity and rightness of life and
   faith in eternal Providence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Jared Sparks, "Life and Writings of Washington," Vol. XII, p. 299.
   Little, Brown, and Company, Boston, 1855.

   [2] Yale University Press, New Haven, 1912; p. 369.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II
HYMNS ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL

   The congregational singing of hymns came into the Christian church by
   unbroken tradition from the old Hebrew worship. Both the hymns and the
   manner of singing them were continued, clearly, by the primitive
   Christians without any sense of change. The compilation of the old
   Hebrew book of religious lyrical poems, it seems, was begun for the
   Temple by that marvelous figure, David, who stands a towering figure as
   musician, statesman, warrior, athlete, economist, king, deep sinner,
   great man of God, and world's greatest hymnist; and it not only
   continued to be the hymn-book of the primitive church but is to-day
   still unaltered--except as translations necessarily alter poetry--a
   treasury of hymnody for general Christendom. The various branches of
   the church have various hymnals, official and unofficial, but the Book
   of Psalms is the book of lyrics that all agree upon and use. There is
   no good book of worship of any kind used by any section of Christianity
   in which the Psalms do not hold an important place. It is perhaps not
   going too far to name this old book of hymns as the most often quoted
   and generally the most familiar single book in the possession of
   Occidental civilization. It is not strange, therefore, considering the
   place it holds to-day and considering the peculiar intimacy of the
   early Christians with it, that they quite naturally retained it as
   their own. One may not read the records far and fail to perceive
   indications of its continuous presence in the thought and affection of
   these people; that is, if one is at all familiar with the spirit and
   poetical manner of the Psalms. How near this book of poetry is to the
   heart of Christianity is indicated by its intimate connection with the
   life of Christ himself, from the story of the Annunciation on. His last
   words from the cross are quotations from the hymns of his people,
   Psalms 32:1 and 31:5.

   The writers of the gospel and the epistles, concise and swift-moving as
   their style generally is, find time and occasion, according to a
   careful study made by Professor Crawford H. Toy, of Harvard, in his
   "Quotations in the New Testament," for 137 quotations from the Psalms.
   That the writers of the New Testament in their stupendous earnestness
   quote verses of lyrical poetry to so large an extent has its
   significance. It shows surely that this poetry was not only deeply
   based in the common popular affection but it stood in a place of
   highest intellectual power and literary dignity. The early Christians
   continued to sing, as their forefathers had done, from their most
   familiar and best beloved book.

   But while this was the main source of its hymns, the church did not
   confine itself, even from the very early days, entirely to the Psalms.
   In the Book of Luke, Chapters I and II, are recorded four new hymns;
   the song of Elisabeth, mother of John the Baptist, beginning, "Blessed
   art thou among women"; the song of the Virgin Mary, "My soul doth
   magnify the Lord"; the song of Zacharias, "Blessed be the Lord God of
   Israel"; and the song of Simeon, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant
   depart in peace." It is not certain when these particular new songs
   were first sung in primitive places of worship.

   The office of hymn singing in the early Christian church was much the
   same as it is found over the world to-day, especially among what are
   known as the more liberal branches of the church. This is evident from
   the descriptions we have of the singing of the time; few and concise
   descriptions they are, but quite clear. The first account of the
   singing of a hymn by an assemblage of Christians is given by both
   Matthew and Mark in identical words. The story is told with
   characteristic brevity and impressiveness. "And when they had sung an
   hymn [kai humnasantes] they went out into the Mount of Olives."

   It was at a meeting which took place in a large upper room, the
   guest-chamber of a house in Jerusalem. There were thirteen persons
   present, Christ and his twelve disciples. They had supper together, the
   last, a final solemn conference or communion. Church historians believe
   they can say with certainty that the hymn sung here was a part of the
   "Hallel," beginning with the ninety-fifth Psalm, "O come let us sing,"
   and closing with the one hundred and eighteenth, "O give thanks unto
   the Lord, for he is good." The occasion was the feast of the Passover;
   it was the custom to sing all or part of these psalms at that time.
   Whether it was one of these, or whatever the hymn was, we have a very
   definite account of hymn singing at the beginning of the Christian era.
   And it is significant that at the close of this highest feast in the
   history of mankind they should have sung a hymn.

   It is not surprising that we do not find in the early records any
   detailed description of the manner of the religious exercise of
   singing. One might take the records of yesterday or of last year, and
   though he would find abundant mention of hymns even in the daily
   newspapers, he might search far without finding any detailed
   description of the singing. Still, in the comparatively few records of
   early days there are glimpses such as the one given above, which shows
   beyond a doubt that what is known familiarly to-day as congregational
   singing was a very prominent feature in the worship of the primitive
   church. The epistles make frequent mention of religious song, and urge
   the people to sing. St. Paul, writing to "the saints and faithful
   brethren in Christ which are at Colosse," says, "Let the word of Christ
   dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another
   in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
   hearts unto the Lord." (Colossians 3:16.) That Paul was not writing
   merely an abstract theory about the socially and individually elevating
   effect of music and lyrical poetry is made evident by a dramatic
   glimpse of him and his companion Silas, in jail at Philippi, given by
   St. Luke in the Acts. St. Paul is putting his theory of poetry into
   very definite practice. "And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang
   praises unto God, and the prisoners heard them." (Acts 16:25.)

   The Epistle of James, "to the twelve tribes which are scattered
   abroad," has this admonition in regard to hymns: "Is any among you
   afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms." (James
   5:13.) It may be mentioned here that the words "psalm" and "hymn" seem
   to have been used almost interchangeably. The distinction in our use of
   the words seems to have been made arbitrarily and much later. The
   Hebrew name for the Book of Psalms was "Book of Praise"; the Greek term
   is in some manuscripts psalmoi, and in others psalterion, both from
   psallein, which meant the twanging of strings. It is significant that
   the Hebrew title-word for the book looked toward the poetry, and the
   Greek toward the music. The Latin and modern languages have followed
   the Greek in nomenclature, but the Hebrew in idea. "Psalm" and
   "psalter" come from "psaltery," a stringed instrument, as "lyric" from
   "lyre."

   The Latin hymnus is from the Greek humnos, a song of praise. "Psalms,"
   as St. James used the word, perhaps did not differentiate the one
   hundred and fifty lyrics which we call the Psalms from the other
   religious lyrics, such as the Song of Miriam or the "Magnificat" or the
   "Nunc Dimittis."

   There is another kind of indication that the people were interested in
   hymnody in those days. In our time the interest is sometimes so warm as
   to give rise to flurries of contention. There is a hint of the same
   thing in a letter of St. Paul to his flock at Corinth. "How is it,
   then, brethren?" he writes; "when ye come together every one of you
   hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath
   an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying." (I
   Corinthians 14:26.)

   To his group of converts in the desperate environment at Ephesus he
   writes, "Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with
   the spirit speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual
   songs, singing and making melody in your hearts unto the Lord."
   (Ephesians 5:19.) The clear ringing poetry of the passage, and the fact
   that the latter part is repeated in Colossians 3:13, suggest that the
   passage is itself the fragment of an early lost hymn, written possibly
   by St. Paul. The words are highly significant, too, as embodying for
   the scholarly saint and citizen of the world his theory of the nature
   and use of poetry. The idea clearly implied is that poetry in its
   origin is a sort of drunkenness, not of wine but of spiritual
   possession: be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the spirit. [3]

   The idea of the poise and composure of soul by poetry is implied in the
   antithesis of "wine wherein is excess." The idea of the use, communally
   and individually, of the lyrics in question, shows how exalted was St.
   Paul's conception of the use of poetry in the world. The passage
   reminds one of another and lesser minister of religion, Robert Herrick,
   and his remark about "lyric" feasts contrasted with feasts where wine
   flowed freely. The poets, he said, were "not mad, but nobly wild." St.
   Paul was writing from a depth of earnestness and wisdom of which
   Herrick probably never dreamed; still, they both were touching upon the
   same mystery, the mystery of poetic inspiration and participation.

   The diffusion of lyrical poetry among the people from whom sprang the
   Old and New Testaments is clear. They were profoundly religious people,
   and at the same time a profoundly poetical people. The blocked-out
   generalization that the Romans taught the world how to organize and
   prosecute efficiently the practical affairs of life, that the Greeks
   taught it broad-mindedness and good taste, and that Israel taught it
   religion, is a convenient generalization, and, of course, largely true.
   But the life of these dwellers among the Palestine hills was, if we
   judge by their literature, vibrant with poetic impulse. Their religious
   nature found utterance in their poetry. Their poetry is mainly lyrical.
   It is therefore to be expected that glimpses which we have of their
   daily life should show them singing hymns in their great temple choirs,
   in congregations, in smaller assemblages, and at home.

   The leaders of the early church saw the power of the religious lyric
   not only as a means of spiritual gratification and nurture but also as
   a means of propagating the new doctrine. That is a matchless lyric
   which St. Paul himself writes in his first letter to the Corinthians,
   Chapter XIII: "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels."
   To the Christians at Rome he sends a letter urging them to show
   spiritual hospitality to the Gentiles, quoting from the Psalms
   themselves, and pointing out the force of hymnody: "And that the
   Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy; as it is written, For this
   cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy
   name. And again he saith, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people. And
   again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; and laud him, all ye people."
   (Romans 15:9-12; Psalms 117:1 and 18:49.) He quotes to the same effect
   from the twenty-second Psalm in the letter to the Hebrews: "I will
   declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I
   sing praise unto thee." (Hebrews 2:12; Psalms 22:23-25.) In the
   Apocalypse there are visions of the whole world come to so high a place
   of justice and concord that the nations sing hymns together in
   celebration of right judgment and of the Source of it.

   As to the writing of new hymns to sing, the early Christians probably
   felt no other restraint than the limit of their ability to write
   poetry. St. Paul's poem on charity--Love for Humanity--mentioned above,
   may or may not have been sung as a hymn or "spiritual song." There is a
   passage in the writings of St. Paul, Romans 8:35-39, which seems to be
   a complementary poem, on Love for God. It closes:

     For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
     principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
     nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
     separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

   Both might have been written for hymns, and sung in the congregation.
   Surely both are magnificent lyrics.

   The following quotation in Ephesians 5:13 may be from a hymn the rest
   of which has been lost: "Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the
   dead, and Christ shall give thee light."

   Certainly among the earliest hymns besides those mentioned are the
   "Gloria Patri," the "Ter Sanctus," the "Song of the Three Hebrew
   Children," and the "Te Deum." No one knows just when and by whom these
   hymns were written or first sung.

   Objections to "new songs," as such, probably did not arise until the
   first great heretical controversies. These controversies between the
   orthodox and the Gnostics and the Arians gave rise to outbursts of
   hymnody on opposing sides. Up to the end of the first century there was
   probably little hindrance to the free composition and use of hymns in
   the meetings for worship. The famous letter of Pliny the Younger, in
   Book X, written while he was governor of Bithynia, to the Emperor
   Trajan, describes the singing of Christians as he saw them in his
   province. It is a disappointing view of those pioneers of the faith;
   but one must remember that they were still frail human beings, and
   moreover that the letter is written by a pagan Roman governor to his
   pagan master. One must admit at the same time that Pliny's letter has a
   tone of fairness.

   The letter, part of which follows here, was written from Bithynia about
   seventy-five years after the death of Christ. Pliny explains that the
   information concerning the meetings of Christians for worship was
   obtained by torture from two slaves who were called "deaconesses."

     An anonymous placard was posted accusing a large number of persons
     by name. All those who denied being or having been Christians
     repeated after me prayers to the gods, and offered worship, with
     frankincense and wine, to your statue and to the images of the gods
     which I had brought in for the occasion; and they finally uttered
     malediction to Christ--none of which things it is reported a true
     Christian can be forced to do; these persons I thought fit to
     release.

     Others under the accusation at first confessed to being Christians,
     then denied it--they had been, indeed, but they had given it up,
     some, three years, others many years, and some as many as
     twenty-five years ago. They affirmed, however, that the extent of
     their error or wrongdoing was in the fact that they were accustomed
     to meet on stated days before dawn, and to sing songs to Christ as
     god, binding themselves by solemn oath (sacramento) not to commit
     crime, but to abstain from cheating, adultery, perjury, to meet to
     take food together; the meal was an ordinary one, however, with
     nothing wrong about it.

   As the adherents of Christianity increased in numbers, and as Christian
   gatherings became established in towns and cities through a constantly
   widening range, it was but natural that new converts and new
   environments should add new elements to the hymnody. They of course
   retained the Psalms. But naturally this poetry would have to be
   translated into the tongues of the people over whom Christianity was
   making its new conquests. The new religion recognized no racial or
   national barriers; St. Paul and St. John had won that fight. If the
   Syrians, Greeks, or Romans had anything good and innocent to
   contribute, Christianity was, at least ideally, ready to accept it. So
   new rhythms, new music, and new songs came into the church as it spread
   its bounds. Eusebius in his "[11]History of the Church," V:xxvii,
   speaks of the "psalms and hymns written by the brethren from the
   beginning" with evident approval. The first powerful influence directed
   toward curbing the poetic impulse of the church was that of Paul of
   Samosata. He translated the Psalms, emending them to suit his own
   notions, and adding his peculiar ideas to them. He insisted insolently
   that his translation should be the only one allowed, and that,
   moreover, nothing but the Psalms should be permitted to be sung. At the
   second council at Antioch, an appeal is made to the bishops of
   Alexandria and Rome against him, charging that he had "put a stop to
   the psalms that were sung to our Lord Jesus Christ, as being
   innovations, the work of later times."

   It was inevitable that in regard to the poetry of the church there
   should be a conservative element tending to exclude the new, and a
   forward element eager for untried things--that there should be
   extremists, the hidebound and the radical, the one rejecting much that
   was good and beautiful in rejecting all that was new; the other running
   after follies because they were merely new. Then followed lusty
   fighting among the hymners. The free-thinking saints and the orthodox
   saints were not only composing and singing hymns embodying their
   articles of faith, but they were organizing rival choirs of men and
   women. The streets of Constantinople rang at midnight with the songs of
   the choirs of Chrysostom, who was aided and encouraged by the empress,
   and with the songs of the Arians on the other side.

   In Syria during the second century, probably near 150 A. D.,
   Bardesanes, a poet and scholar, wrote many hymns and psalms tinged with
   Gnostic views. He was followed by other poets. Only fragments of this
   early Syrian hymnody remain now. But clearly it was much alive and
   influential in the middle of the fourth century, when Ephrem Syrus came
   out to do battle against it.

     This champion of Christ put on his arms and proclaimed war against
     the forces of the enemies, especially against the wickedness of
     Bardesanes and his followers. And the blessed Ephrem, seeing that
     all men were led by music, rose up and opposed the profane choruses
     of the young people, and taught them odes and scales and responses .
     . . and things of spiritual wisdom. . . . And he, like a father in
     the midst of them, in the churches, a spiritual harper, arranged for
     them different kinds of songs, and taught them the variation of
     chants; until the whole city was gathered to him, and the party of
     the adversary was put to shame and defeated.

   Ephrem admits his opponent's skill, in these lines:


   Thus in his odes he testifieth--

   (This wizard by his blandishments,

   And this lax one of his melodies),--

   That he dishonors the fair names

   Of the Holy Spirit.

   He says further,


   He therefore set in order

   Psalms one hundred and fifty

   But he deserted the truth of David,

   And only imitated his numbers.

   These passages are from "Opera Ephraemi," Tom. VI, translated by Henry
   Burgess, "Lyric Hymns," London, 1853.

   Ephrem deliberately set out to study the science of poetry in order to
   better what his rival had done. The following one of his hymns shows an
   entirely new element in Christian religious song. It shows a more
   detailed and leisurely kind of speculation than is found in the Hebrew
   or New Testament lyrics. Its style is more after that of Mars Hill than
   of Mount Zion:


   The soul having left the body,

   Is in great suffering,

   And feels much grief;

   And she is distracted hither and thither,

   Hither and thither,

   As to her destination;

   For the evil spirits desire

   That she should go with them

   Into the midst of Gehenna;

   And the angels also,

   That she should journey with them,

   To the region of light.


   In that moment,

   The soul lightly esteems

   Her beloved friends and brethren

   Whom she held dear,

   And her neighbors,

   And those with whom she was familiar.

   In that hour she despises

   Whatever pertains to riches,

   Or worldly possessions;

   But respecting her trespasses

   She has great anxiety,

   They being so many.


   Then the soul standing separate,

   Above the body she hath left,

   Speaks to it thus,--

   "Death hath dismissed me,

   Remain thou here in peace

   For I am going away."

   Then the body replies,--

   "Depart thou in peace,

   O soul tenderly loved!

   The Lord who hath fashioned us,

   He will procure our deliverance

   From Gehenna!"

   The following is a stanza from a hymn which may have been written to be
   sung in the assemblies and in the processions against the rival sects.
   The verses show that in spite of the fact that the singers have taken
   on much of the style of the extra-Judaic environment, they are sternly
   set against the Greek-world spirit of free speculation:


   He is allied with the infidel

   Who presumptuously investigates;

   At the threshold of death

   Standeth that daring one,

   Who hath laid aside

   His faith with his research

   To descend to fathom

   The sea of hidden mysteries.

   Another stanza shows that while Ephrem Syrus did not, like some of the
   early fathers--and some of the English Puritans--forbid all except the
   canonical biblical verses in public worship, he did insist upon the
   Psalms as the only pattern. Still, as we see, however much he tried to
   model them so, his own compositions were far from being like the
   Psalms.


   Sing not, therefore,

   What is derogatory to God,

   Instead of his praise;

   Lest thou err and sing folly.

   Sing as David did

   To the son of David,

   And call him Lord and Son,

   As David did.

   This early religious struggle seems to have called forth an outburst of
   singing. Ephrem Syrus urges the faithful to compose and sing new songs.


   Make thy praise ripe,

   And offer to him

   Of the clusters of grapes

   Which thy tongue hath gathered.

   A part of one of his hymns is addressed directly to the devil, examples
   of which in Christian hymnody are rare.


   Cursed be thou, O Satan,

   In the name of Jesus the God;

   And let thy profane mouth be closed

   At the command of Christ the Lord! [4]

   These hymns of Ephrem say much about death. One of the songs examines
   into the graves of a beggar and a king, finding the ashes the same.
   Particularly frequent is the mention of singing itself, and making
   verses of praise, and playing accompaniments.

   St. Basil, who died in the year 279, testifies to the power and beauty
   of the hymnody of his time. In the following passage, it is quite clear
   that he is speaking of what we now call congregational singing:

     If the ocean is beautiful and worthy of praise to God, how much more
     beautiful is the conduct of the Christian assembly where the voices
     of men and women and children, blended and sonorous like the waves
     that break upon the beach, rise amidst our prayers to the very
     presence of God.

   It will be noted that the part of women in the singing of the early
   church is not left in doubt here; nor is it left doubtful in the
   accounts of Ephrem, Chrysostom, and Augustine. It is also noteworthy in
   this connection that two of the four great hymns of the New Testament
   are attributed to the authorship of women. There is no question that
   the singing of this age among the Christians was very general and very
   spirited.

   These glimpses of the life of the Christians in the early centuries are
   enough to indicate that congregational singing was a very prominent and
   important part of their worship.

   Especially is it noticeable and significant that from the death of
   Christ on down through the ages, when the saints and martyrs and other
   faithful come to die they go out repeating or singing some verse or
   snatch of hymn or psalm. It shows how deeply this form of lyrical
   poetry has entered into their lives. Whether the church was suffering
   martyrdom or inflicting martyrdom, it seems to have been the rule that
   the smoke rising up around the stake choked the martyr's singing.

   It is not within the scope of this work to discuss the origins and
   differences of the Christian liturgies. The purpose at this point is to
   show that from the very first hymn singing was an important part of
   Christian worship. Cantors or leaders were certainly employed in some
   places, as were trained choirs later. But this was by no means to the
   exclusion of congregational singing--the men, women, and children
   singing in concert. Old hymns, psalms, and canticles, as well as new
   hymns composed from time to time by men and women, were sung in the
   churches in smaller assemblages, and by individuals. St. Paul's
   prohibition of women's speaking in the churches was not a prohibition
   of their singing the hymns. The injunction that women should not speak
   is, by the way, good evidence that they had been speaking. Some think
   that the prohibition referred only to the women of the church at
   Corinth, to which St. Paul was writing; but this is hardly likely, for
   the order seems to be general and is repeated in the letter to Timothy.

   The fourteenth chapter of First Corinthians sheds a good deal of light
   on the primitive church worship. The writer directs that the
   service--singing, prayers, preaching, and discussions--is to be carried
   on in the language of the majority of the people present. This of
   course necessitated the translation of the songs. He says that although
   the people may have the spirit of prayer while repeating prayers in a
   language they do not know, it is better that they should understand
   what they are saying. He says, too, that he wishes to sing both with
   the "spirit and understanding." He further offers what seems a
   half-humorous rebuke to certain ones who, at least partly out of
   vanity, insist on using a foreign tongue. He tells them that while he
   is acquainted with more languages than all of them, he had rather say
   five words that could be understood than five thousand words in a
   strange tongue.

   As for the psalms and spiritual songs which they sang, how or by whom
   they were translated is not clear; that is, of course, in the very
   early church. It is quite clear that before long the Psalms were
   translated many times. There were innumerable translations of the
   favorite ones, and many translations of the entire one hundred and
   fifty.

   The oldest hymn of the Christian church, outside of the Bible, say the
   historians of the times, is one by Clement of Alexandria. The well
   known translation by E. H. Plumptre begins, "Curb for stubborn steed."
   But [12]Alexander's translation,


   Bridle of colts untamed,

   Over our will presiding;

   Wing of the unwandering birds,

   Our flight securely guiding;

   Rudder of youth unbending,

   Firm against adverse shock,

   is the most literal and picturesque rendering. It is mainly a list of
   vivid metaphors addressed to Christ as the good Providence.

   There was a great mass of Greek hymnody. To Gregory of Nazianzus alone
   are attributed more than thirty thousand hymns. John Mason Neale, in
   his [13]"Hymns of the Eastern Church," computed that there are in the
   office-books of the Eastern Church at least four thousand closely
   printed quarto pages, in double columns, of hymnic verse. This does not
   include the earlier Greek hymns written in classical meters. There must
   have been, then, a great deal of hymn singing among the early Greek
   Christians. Even in their homes when they lighted their candles in the
   evening they had a particular song to sing; it is still a famous hymn
   used in the Eastern Church, and known in English hymnals as the
   "candle-light hymn." The translation by E. W. Eddie begins:


   O, brightness of the immortal Father's face,

   Most holy, heavenly, blest,

   Lord Jesus Christ, in whom his truth and grace

   Are vividly expressed;


   The sun is sinking now, and one by one

   The lamps of evening shine,

   We hymn the eternal Father and the Son,

   And Holy Ghost Divine.

   This hymn is in the new [14]hymnal of the Protestant Episcopal Church.

   St. Basil (A. D. 370) refers to the custom and the hymn; it was
   "ancient" then, he says:

     It seemed fitting to our fathers not to receive the gift of light at
     eventide in silence, but on its appearing immediately to give
     thanks. Who was the author of these words of thanksgiving at the
     Lighting of the Lamps we are not able to say.

   There is frequent reference in this poetry to singing, and to musical
   accompaniment.


   Wake, wake, I pray thee, shrill-toned lyre!

   No more to fan the Teian fire,

   No more the Lesbian strain to raise!

   Wake, wake to hymn of nobler praise.

   The following quotations are from A. W. Chatfield's "[15]Songs and
   Hymns of the Greek Christian Poets":


   And in the depth of sky

   Unfathomed we descry

   Thy ruling hand and power; for it is there

   That thou the stars doth lead

   And in Light's pastures feed

   The glittering hosts with a true shepherd's care.

   Notice the Greek way of saying, "The heavens declare the glory of God,
   and the firmament showeth his handiwork." This is from the hymn of
   Bishop Synesius (375-430).

   The following stanza from "A Hymn to Christ" by Gregory, Bishop of
   Nazianzus (325-389), is typical of much of the Greek hymnody, more
   speculative, less concrete than the Hebrew:


   Beginning none, nor end;

   The self-spring Light art thou;

   We cannot comprehend,

   But to thy brightness bow,

   Whose eye, repelling mortal gaze,

   All things above, below, surveys.

   His "Hymn to God," two stanzas of which in [16]Chatfield's translations
   are given here, show the Platonic cast of mind:


   Unuttered Thou, all uttered things

   Have had their birth in thee;

   The One unknown! from thee the springs

   Of all we know and see.


   And all things as they move along

   In order fixed by thee,

   The watchword heed in silent song

   Hymning thy majesty.

   Of all the images used to represent the Deity in these Greek hymns, it
   is significant that "light" occurs more often than any other, probably
   more often than all other figures combined.

   John Mason Neale made a number of free renderings of Greek hymns which
   seem to have come into the permanent treasury of English hymnody. The
   dramatic lyric,


   Christian, dost thou see them

   On the holy ground?

   is a powerful hymn. An example of almost purely descriptive lyric is
   seen in the hymn beginning:


   Fierce was the wild billow;

   Dark was the night;

   Oars labored heavily;

   Foam glimmered white,

   Trembled the mariners;

   Peril was nigh;

   Then said the God of Gods

   --"Peace! it is I!"

   One of the few dialogue hymns of the English hymnody and one of the
   most beautiful of English hymns is Neale's translation, or rather
   paraphrase, of a hymn by St. Stephen the Sabaite (725-794):


   Art thou weary, art thou languid?

   Another with much of the Greek spirit left in the translation begins:


   Unity of threefold Light.

   It was written by Metrophanes, Bishop of Smyrna, around 910. Another,


   The day is past and over,

   All thanks, O Lord, to thee,

   Neale tells us is still a great favorite in the Greek isles, and "is to
   the scattered villages of Chios and Mitylene what Bishop Ken's Evening
   Hymn is to the villages of our own land."

   Since the middle of the last century there has been a growing interest
   in the discovered wealth of Greek Christian hymnody. The "Bishop of
   Jerusalem" controversy doubtless did something to stir up an interest
   in England. Hymnody seems to thrive during controversies and stirrings
   of soul.

   In 1862 John Mason Neale's "[17]Hymns of the Eastern Church" attracted
   much notice. Littledale, Dix, [18]Chatfield, [19]Brownlie, and Moorsom
   have made important contributions both in translation and criticism. In
   Leipsic, 1876, appeared the most important collection of Greek hymns,
   that of Paranikas and Christ, "Anthologia Graeca Carminum
   Christianorum."

   It is not surprising that this new knowledge of Greek hymnody has given
   the English church a new sense of the ideal unity of Christians, and
   has done much to minimize the differences between the Anglican and
   Eastern churches. Interest was aroused among some by the discovery of
   an old letter saying that John Wesley had received, before leaving for
   America, episcopal ordination from a bishop of the Greek Church. If
   this were true, it would make John Wesley a priest in the Church of
   England, bishop of the Eastern Church, and a sort of archbishop of the
   Methodists all at the same time. This is mentioned merely as an example
   of discussions resulting from the interest aroused concerning the
   Eastern Catholic Church by the introduction of its hymnody into the
   Protestant churches.

   We have seen that St. Paul and the early fathers urged the composing
   and singing of hymns in the new languages as Christianity made its new
   advances. No hymns in Latin, however, are now extant that were written
   before about the middle of the fourth century. The first Latin
   hymn-writer, a native of what is now France, named Hilary, was born at
   Poitiers, about 300. He was made bishop of his native city in 353.
   Banished three years later by the Emperor Constantine to Phrygia for
   being too zealous in theological controversy, he hears the Eastern
   Christians singing their hymns. A good deal of the four years' exile
   must have been spent in writing hymns after the manner of the East. His
   volume of hymns, "Liber Mysteriorum," has been lost. St. Alcuin
   ascribed the "Gloria in Excelsis" to him. He may have translated and
   introduced it. On his return from exile he seems to have aroused a new
   and fervid interest in hymn singing. His hymn beginning,


   Hymnum dicat turba fratrum,

   Hymnum cantus personet,

   is typical of the frequent exhortation to singing.

   Ambrose (340-397) was, like Hilary, a Frenchman, a great fighter, and a
   great singer. Both of these men were evidently strong and brilliant
   characters. The poetical powers of Ambrose are indicated in the old
   legend that at the conversion of St. Augustine in the church at Milan
   Ambrose and the new convert stood before the altar and composed and
   sang responsively the "Te Deum," which is marked by many as the
   greatest Christian hymn.

   The writings of St. Augustine have frequent mention of the singing of
   psalms and hymns. For example, he advised his followers to memorize the
   Psalms, so that they might "with godly melody cheer up their very
   heart." In his "[20]Confessions" he says, "I will call to mind the
   tears I shed at the hearing of the church songs in the beginning of my
   recovered faith." Before his time and since, many of the good and noble
   men of the world have attributed, with Augustine, much to the early
   influence of hymns sung by pious mothers. In his [21]comment on the
   Psalms he says, concerning some Christians who had been driven out from
   their homes: "Were there then held any congregations and jubilees to
   the honor of God? Were those hymns chanted in concert from the churches
   of God what they were wont to be sung in concert in time of peace and
   to be sounded in a sweet accord of brotherhood in the ears of God?"

   Doubt as to the matter of congregational singing of hymns in the
   churches at this time would, it seems, be cleared by the words of
   Augustine himself. In his "[22]Confessions" he writes,

     How did I weep in thy Hymns and Canticles, sharply affected by the
     voices of the church sweetly singing them. . . . Not long had the
     church begun to practise this kind of consolation and exhortation,
     the brethren giving great care to the tuneful harmony of voices and
     hearts. . . . The devout people kept watch in the church ready to
     die with their bishop thy servant. There my mother, thy handmaid,
     bearing a chief part of those anxieties and watchings, lived in
     prayers. Then it was first instituted that, according to the custom
     of Eastern regions, hymns and psalms should be sung, lest the people
     should faint through fatigue and sorrow, and from that day to this
     the custom has been retained; and to-day indeed almost all thy
     congregations throughout other parts of the world follow that
     example.

   Describing the death of his mother, the famous and pious Monica, he
   says:

     The boy Adeodatus being stilled from weeping, Eudius took up the
     psalter and began to sing (our whole house answering him) the
     Psalm--"I will sing of mercy and judgment; to thee, O Lord, will I
     sing."

   After days of unutterable grief [says Augustine], as I was alone in my
   bed, I remembered those true verses of thine Ambrose:


   Maker of all, the Lord,

   And ruler of the height,

   While robing day in light, hath poured

   Soft slumbers o'er the night.

   [23]Marcus Prudentius, a Spaniard, born in 348, eight years later than
   Ambrose, contributed many hymns to the Latin hymnody. Neale calls him
   "the prince of early Christian poets." A famous lawyer, judge, and
   soldier, he entered the church at the age of fifty-seven, and for the
   rest of his life was an ecclesiastical apologist and poet.


   Now then at last, close to the very end of life,

   May yet my sinful soul put off her foolishness,

   And if by deed it cannot, yet at least by words give praise to God,

   Join day to day by constant hymns.

   Fail not each night in songs to celebrate the Lord,

   Fight against the heresies, maintain the Catholic faith.

   Merely the titles of his poems bear witness to the place of hymnody in
   the lives of the people: "For Cock-Crow"; "For Morning"; "Before Meat";
   "After Meat"; "At the Lighting of Lamps"; "Before Sleep"; "Fasting";
   "Burial."

   The hymn "For Cock-Crow" shows his deep piety, and his mastery of the
   hymn form:


   Ales, diei nuntius,

   Lucem propinquam praecinit;

   Nos excitator mentium

   Iam Christus ad vitam vocat.


   "Auferte," clamat, "lectulos

   AEgros, soporos, desides,

   Costique, recti, ac sobrii

   Vigilante; iam sum proximus."


   Iseum ciamus vocibus,

   Flentes, precantes, sobrii:

   Intenta supplicatio

   Dormire cor mundum vetat.


   Tu, Christe, somnum disice;

   Tu rumpe notis vincula;

   Tu solve peccatum vetus,

   Novumque lumen ingere!

   Two stanzas of Neale's translation follow; he adds rime, which had not
   yet come into Latin hymns:


   The winged herald of the day

   Proclaims the morn's approaching ray;

   And Christ the Lord our souls excites,

   And so to endless life invites.


   "Take up thy bed" to each he cries,

   "Who, sick, or wrapped in slumber, lies,

   And chaste and just and sober stand,

   And watch, my coming is at hand."

   The fourth century must have seen an outburst of song somewhat like
   that which Germany saw in Luther's time, France in Marot's time, and
   England in the times of Wyclif and of the Wesleys. St. Jerome, speaking
   of the hymnody of the period, says, "One cannot go into the field
   without hearing the plower at his halleluiahs, and the mower at his
   hymns." Augustine speaks with great feeling of the influence of the
   hymns which his mother had learned at the church of Milan.

   These statements give some idea of hymn singing in Syria,
   Constantinople, and Rome. There is a curious account of a pilgrimage
   made to Palestine near the close of the fourth century, by St. Silvia
   of Aquitania. It may be that this pilgrim was partial to hymnody; but,
   at any rate, accounts of hymn singing have a large place in her story.
   Her party had been to the Mount of the Ascension singing:

     And thence with hymns, all, down to the smallest child, descend on
     foot to Gethsemane. . . . When they arrived at Gethsemane, first a
     suitable prayer is offered, then a hymn is sung, then that passage
     of the gospel where the Lord is apprehended; and there is much
     moaning and groaning of all the people with weeping that the groans
     may be heard almost to the city. From that hour, they go on foot to
     the city with hymns. [5]

   She was at Jerusalem at Easter. After mass, she says:

     Both men and women, as many people as wish, go up to Olivet. Hymns
     are sung and prayers offered. After that psalms have been sung and
     prayers offered, they descend again with hymns at the hour of
     vespers. . . . Selections are read there, and hymns interspersed;
     antiphons are also sung suitable to the day and place.

   Another indication of the prevalence of singing is in a letter from
   Jerome concerning the death of Paula in Jerusalem:

     No weeping nor lamentations followed her death, but all present
     united in chanting the Psalms, each in their several tongues. . . .
     One after another they chanted the Psalms, now in Greek, now in
     Latin, now in Syriac, throughout the remainder of the week. [6]

   Clement of Alexandria in one of his homilies says, "A noble hymn of God
   is an immortal man established in righteousness in whom the oracles of
   truth are engraved."

   Ancient Latin hymns may be said to close with St. Gregory the Great.
   The hymn "Veni Creator"--translated, "Come, Holy Ghost, our souls
   inspire," by John Cosin--is attributed uncertainly both to Gregory and
   to Charlemagne. "The Gregorian tones or chants," says Julian in his
   "[24]Dictionary of Hymnology," "we owe to his anxiety to supersede the
   more melodious and flowing style of church music, which is popularly
   attributed to St. Ambrose, by the severer and more solemn monotone
   which is their characteristic."

   With Fortunatus (530-609) and the Venerable Bede (637-735) begins the
   medieval hymnody which reached its splendid height in the twelfth and
   thirteenth centuries. In form the Latin verse had tended more and more
   to break away from the classical quantity measure and to fall into the
   accented measure. With it came the decoration of rime. Hymnody became
   more and more popular, and more rich and splendid through the Middle
   Ages. The rime and the musical beat charmed the ears of the common
   people and clung in their memory. "This verse," says Clement Blume, in
   his article on hymns in "The Catholic Encyclopedia," "was especially
   for the congregation; for the people who in those days took a much more
   active and important part in the Liturgy than is now the case.
   Christian hymnody is therefore originally and essentially a poetry of
   the people." For influence, no other form of literature of the Middle
   Ages approached its hymnody. The fact that half a dozen of those hymns,
   translated into English within the last two generations, have taken
   their places among the most familiar and best loved hymns indicates
   that the praise lavished upon them by modern critics is just; but
   nothing can indicate their splendor and magnificence except the Latin
   poems themselves. The "Dies Irae," named the most splendid of them all,
   while it is what Theodore Parker termed a "damnation lyric," has a
   tremendous music about it, and a combination of pathos and grandeur
   that would distinguish any century that produced such a song.

   "Jerusalem the golden"; "Jesus the very thought of thee"; "Jerusalem,
   my happy home"; "O come, all ye faithful," as the first lines of
   English translations, are powerful in themselves. The number of these
   medieval hymns still extant is enormous. The largest collection of them
   is that brought together by Dreves and Blume, "Analecta, Hymnica Medii
   AEvi" (Leipsic, 1866-1906); it is made up mainly of hymns that had not
   been published by other compilers, such as Mone, who had previously
   brought out three large volumes. The Dreves and Blume collection fills
   fifty-four large volumes, averaging about two hundred and fifty poems
   to the volume. Ker, in "The Dark Ages," says,

     No literary work of the dark ages can be compared for the extent and
     far reaching results of its influence with the development of
     popular Latin poetry. The hymn went further and affected a larger
     number of people's minds than anything else in literature.

   Two things about the hymns are increasingly noticeable: the trend
   toward perfection of music, meter, and rime, and the trend toward the
   worship of the Virgin and the saints. The verse and structure and the
   riming effect are developed into marvelous creations.

   Lines of Bernard of Cluny's "Laus Patriae Coelestis" or "In Contemptu
   Mundi" will indicate the involved artistry:


   Hora novissima, tempora pessima sunt vigilemus;

   Ecce minaciter, imminet arbiter ille supremus.

   About 90 per cent of the hymns of the eleventh and twelfth centuries
   are addressed to or made in honor of the Virgin or the saints. The
   deeper thought of the people, and the gradual changes of thought, are
   clearly mirrored in their songs. "Hymns bear testimony," says T. Hill
   Odell in his "English Monasticism," "not only literary but historical,
   as to the state of the church at any given time, and certainly it is
   one of the best and purest testimonies that can be found."

   Surely, then, these hymns are out of an age of lively and fervent
   faith. Those people believe with a will. Their hymns are triumphant
   statements of faith. Even the hymns picturing the misery of the world
   take on a swing and beat and rime that is all but joyous.

   One proof of their consummate art is in the way with which the songs
   seem to feed the hungry spirit. The hungering mendicant could walk the
   road in his dirt and rags and sing himself into possession of lavish
   riches and comforts--palaces, clear fountains, gardens, and gallant
   walks, whitest clothes, and jewels.

   In these hymns, too, we can see the heart speaking out in contradiction
   to certain dogmas. "Against the things ye bid me speak," says
   Whittier's hymn, "my heart within me pleads." An example of this may be
   seen in Bernard of Clairvaux's "Ad Christum a Cruce Pendentem." The
   dogma and logic of the Middle Ages said that the human form is vile
   food for worms, hateful, shameful, a foul bond holding down the wings
   of the soul. But in this hymn the physical form is praised. There are
   seven sections of it, each devoted to a member of the body. And they
   could honor, sing hymns, to the rosy flesh of Mary. Not only was the
   body of a saint honorable, but even a piece of bone, the dust of the
   foot, was holy. If their older theology degraded the physical being,
   their hymns cried out in the other extreme, exalting it.

   There is a more striking instance of the poetic spirit and the human
   heart asserting itself in spite of dogma and scholastic logic.
   Womankind in the medieval days was held, with Eve as the prototype, to
   be distinctly the ally of the evil powers, and the one responsible for
   the deplorable state the world had got itself into. Chaucer's Man of
   Lawe expressed the idea:


   O Satan, envious sin thilke day

   That thou wert chased from our heritage,

   Wel knowestow to wommen the olde way!

   Thou madest Eva bringe us in servage.

   And yet in spite of themselves they were worshiping, as the special
   object of devotion, Mary, the type of the eternal woman; in her was
   gentleness, kindness, meekness, instinctive good sense, sympathy,
   wholesome womanly indignation. From the thousands of stories of Mary's
   common sense and timely help, one sees what these men thought of woman
   in spite of dogma and tradition. The Blessed Virgin, an idealized type
   of their own womankind, was impetuous at times; she had been known to
   change her mind. It was after all the woman, in spite of the hard
   doctrines about her, that made the world livable. A good clerk was
   tired out and sleepy; the Virgin would take the book and sing in his
   place, who had always been punctilious in showing toward her image the
   proper tokens of respect. She would reach out her arm and deal a sound
   miraculous slap to some undutiful clerk or layman who needed it. She
   once gave a bishop a good beating for deposing one of the younger
   clergy who had never yet passed her statue without obeisance. Good
   Walter of Birback, delayed for a tournament, found when he reached the
   field that he had already vanquished his evil opponents; the Virgin had
   taken his place. A man sold his wife to the devil. The wife, suspecting
   something, stopped at Mary's shrine. The Virgin took her place, rode to
   the rendezvous, and sent the old dragon howling into hell.

   The hymns of this period were to Mary. If their hard logic made God an
   angry, unreasonable, and unlovable deity whom they could not truly
   worship, they could praise their gracious ideality, the kind, just,
   humane Virgin. Their scheme of thought condemned woman, but their
   hearts and their hymns adored her. If their dogma took the kindness and
   humaneness out of religion, their hearts put it back and their hymns
   asserted it in great joy and beauty.

   In England, both the Latin hymnody and the vernacular had flourished
   from the first. Augustine's missionaries landed and swung up the beach
   into line singing Latin hymns. The first poetic note in native English
   poetry, as we have seen, was hymnal, as had been the case in French
   poetry. And in Germany hymns had their most familiar home. Hymns had
   been sounding through Europe for these centuries, and had become part
   of the bone and sinew of the people.

   A volume of verses might be cited to show the astonishing skill with
   which the later medieval poets wrote their hymns. But the art fell off
   finally into mere verbal ingenuity.

   From the many thousands of Latin hymns the English hymn-books have
   chosen a few of the great ones. Doubtless more of them will be adopted
   as better translations appear. Among the most familiar are: "Adeste
   Fideles," of the eighteenth century, authorship unknown; the "Dies
   Irae," probably by Thomas of Celono, about 1250; "Pange Lingua
   Gloriosi," by Thomas Aquinas, about 1260; "Stabat Mater Dolorosa," by
   Jocopone de Todi, in the thirteenth century; "Veni Creator Spiritus,"
   authorship uncertain, about 800; and "Vexilla Regis Prodeunt," by
   Fortunatus, 569.

   The Dark Ages were dark--but not utterly dark. Grant all the dust and
   woe, the inarticulate want, the ignorance, the dirt, and wretchedness
   of the common people; the gorgeous finery and stupid cruelty of the
   upper few; the barbaric enthusiasms, the spiritual hysteria, the
   plagues, the brooding superstitions, the fiendish persecution: still
   the human spirit was alive and striving.

   There were the great waves of popular devotion, acts of faith,
   self-renunciation for the love of God, which drew men together as one
   to raise the towering churches, and to move away into the Crusades.
   Simple peasants, kings, and little children did their cheerful parts;
   princesses strained their shoulders against the ropes that pulled the
   huge stone-cart toward the rising cathedral, hymns of praise in stone.
   There was much of faith and hope and charity. The surging hymns of the
   Middle Ages were proof of it; they were born of faith and hope and
   charity and love of light and beauty; they could not so have sounded
   through hall and hut by the road-sides, down the foot-paths, through
   fields and pasture-lands, in the churches and the cloisters, without
   themselves kindling and keeping alive the Christian virtues. Their
   words and music, sometimes pensive, sometimes hilarious, helped to
   break the hold of unknown terrors, enchanters, dragons, and fiends;
   they gave surcease to grief and pain; they called the voices of
   neighbors into unison and their hearts as well; they kept alive a
   common zeal for the City of God. The old age was not the golden age,
   but there was a glow of gold in it which would never have been there
   but for the great hymns that moved like the winds through Europe.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3] Compare with this the idea of Plato and Aristotle as to the origin
   of poetry in the touch of the Muses' madness; and that of Cicero, that
   there is no good poetry, sine quodem afflatu quasi furoris; and
   Shakspere's "fine frenzy."

   [4] William Blake's song addressed to the devil is another:

   "Truly, my Satan, thou are but a dunce,

   And dost not know the garment from the man . . .

   Tho' thou art worshipped by the names

   Of Jesus and Jehovah, thou art still

   The son of Morn in weary Night's decline,

   The lost traveller's dream under the hill."

   [5] "The Pilgrimage of St. Silvia of Aquitania to the Holy Places."
   Translated by John H. Bernard, Palestine Pilgrims' Text Society, London
   1891.

   [6] Ep. 108. 30
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III
THE NATIVE ENGLISH HYMN

   With the coming of the Renaissance, Latin hymnody became one of the old
   things that must pass away. Its heavy surges, sounding so powerfully
   through the age that created it, now began to recede and to become an
   echo. Its art had finally overdone itself and had become an empty
   exercise, the expression not of aspiring faith but rather of ingenuity
   in making words tumble like jugglers' balls in astonishing feats of
   rhythm and rime. The new classical taste, moreover, rejected its Gothic
   exuberance of form. The church, under order of the pope, made a
   sweeping reformation of the words and music of its song. "Hymnody
   then," says Clement Blume, S. J., co-editor of the monumental "Analecta
   Hymnica Medii AEvi," "received its death blow, as under the revision of
   the breviary under Pope Urban VIII the medieval rhythmical hymns were
   forced into more classical forms by means of so-called corrections. The
   hymnody of the Middle Ages is now only an historical monument which
   bears witness to the artistic skill, the joyful singing, and the deep
   religious life of our forefathers."

   But the Christian hymn was not to pass away; Christianity is a singing
   religion sprung out of another singing religion whose ancient
   admonitions said, "Let all the people praise thee," "Praise the Lord
   with a harp," "Sing unto him a new song," "Enter into his courts with
   song," "Sing ye praises with understanding," "Praise him all ye
   people." The early church rose with singing and made its progress
   westward with ever increasing sweep of song. And when the mighty
   harmonies of the Middle Ages died away there was still singing.

   Native vernacular hymns had always existed in England along with the
   Latin. The Latin hymns which the first missionary band sang as they
   landed and marched up the shore of Britain were not long in finding
   echoes in the language of the island. The first song of her first poet
   was a hymn. The uppermost spring of the stream of England's literature
   is a clear-flowing lyric, a hymn of praise to God. This poem of the
   first known writer of English gives forecast of a sturdy quality of the
   literature to consider duty and decorum of life, and "to assert eternal
   Providence." The legend of the shy lad, Caedmon, is not likely to be
   too often called to mind.

   As he slept in the hay in the stable at Whitby, one stood by him and
   said, "Caedmon, sing me something."

   Caedmon said, "I do not know how to sing; that is why I left the feast
   and came out here."

   "Still, you might sing."

   "What shall I sing?"

   "Sing the beginnings of all created things."

   And Caedmon began to sing:


   Nu scylun hergan Heofonriches Uard--

   "Now shall we praise the heaven-kingdom's Keeper." Professor Cook's
   translation is as follows:


   Now must we hymn the Master of heaven,

   The might of the Maker, the deeds of the Father,

   The thought of his heart. He, Lord everlasting,

   Stablished of old the source of all wonders:

   Creator all-holy, hung the bright heaven,

   A roof high upreared, o'er the children of men;

   The king of mankind then created for mortals

   The world in its beauty, the earth spread beneath them,

   He, Lord everlasting, omnipotent God.

   The Venerable Bede (673-735), who was probably a child when Caedmon was
   an old man, tells in his "[25]Ecclesiastical History" of a good deal of
   hymn singing; he composed a book of hymns, and himself died singing.
   St. Patrick and St. Colomba and their followers had cheered their own
   hearts with psalms and hymns and had charmed many savage hearts with
   them. King Alfred so loved his hymn-book that he carried it in his
   bosom and sang as he went to war or traveled among his people or even
   when he went hunting.

   Native English hymns flourished along with the Latin hymns. There were
   many hymns of Latin and English lines alternating and of English verses
   with Latin refrains. The Lord's Prayer, the Creed, the ancient Latin
   hymns, the Psalms, and even the Catechism were turned into popular
   rimes and generally sung. Professor Carleton F. Brown's "Catalogue of
   Old and Middle English Religious Verse," in two large volumes, gives an
   idea of the extent of this kind of poetry. A considerable part of the
   verse listed is lyrical.

   Some of the songs are quaint and lovely; some are plodding, earnest,
   well-intentioned, and dull. Ideas of the Deity are frequently startling
   in their naivete. One pious rimer concludes that "God is a clever
   wight," since he did all his work of creation by word of mouth rather
   than by hard labor. Here are some examples of the native religious
   song:


   Suete iesu, myn huerte gleem

   Brytore then the sonne beem.


   Suete iesu loverde myn

   My lyfe, myn huerte, al is thin.

   Undo myn herte, out lyht ther yn,

   And wite me from fendes engyn. [7]


   Mary flowr of flowrs all,

   Hath born a chyld in an ox stall,--

   That lord and prynce is over all:

   Puer natus est nobis.


   By an apull of a tre

   Bound men all made were we,

   That chyld was born to make us fre:

   Puer natus est nobis.


   The chyld was don on the rode

   With hys flesshe & with hys blood,

   For our helpe & for our gud:

   Puer natus est nobis.


   The IIIde day he rose & to hevyn went,

   Wytt & wysedom us he sent

   For to keep hys commaundment:

   Puer natus est nobis.


   He shall cum down at domys day,

   With blody woundis I you say,

   As he dyed on Gud Fryday:

   Puer natus est nobis.


   Now pray we to that hevyn kyng

   To send us all his dere blessyng,

   Shryft & hosyll at our endyng:

   Puer natus est nobis. [8]

   Another, long and doleful, ends each stanza with the refrain,


   Alas my hart will brek in thre,

   Terribilis mors conturbat me.

   One feels that the anonymous author of the following verse was an
   earnest soul if he was no poet:


   Lord, my God al merciable,

   I the bi-seche with herte stable

   That I mouwe wilne that thing

   That most may beo to thy lyking.

   Now, as earnestness of purpose and freedom of spirit are outstanding
   traits of Christian hymnody, they are outstanding traits, too, of the
   English people. It might have been expected, therefore, that
   freedom-loving and earnest England would be the land where the hymn
   would greatly flourish. And it has flourished. There has been a lively
   English hymnody as long as there has been an English language. And it
   has been a great thing that the rhythm of this song joined in with the
   rhythm of English scythe and oar and spinning-wheel and cradle to
   lighten the burden of toil and lift up the hearts of the people.

   But as vigorous and variegated and prevalent as this union of popular
   poetry and popular music was in England, it strangely weakened and
   paled at the one time in English history when it might have been
   expected most to flourish. The Reformation, born of that new freedom of
   thought and worship which produces the best hymnody, did not in
   England, as it gloriously did in Germany, speak out richly in the
   native vernacular hymn.

   The Elizabethans did not write hymns as we understand the term. There
   was rich popular music and abundant religious poetry; hardly a poet
   from Wyatt on down did not bring forth his "Divine Poems." But the
   distinctive hymn was in disfavor and neglect. The Puritans said: We
   will tolerate nothing in our worship which is not plainly scriptural.
   We will sing only those religious songs that are in the Bible: the
   poets may turn the Bible literally into rime and meter for us; we will
   sing that, but we will not tolerate in our public worship of God any
   hymn of mere "human composure." The other and complementary party
   likewise banned all contemporary and recent hymnody, not, however,
   because it was outside the Bible canon, but because it lacked the
   sanction of ancient ecclesiastical usage.

   So it was that the age of Elizabeth, which might perhaps have produced
   for England poetry as rich and beautiful in the smaller scope of
   hymnody as it produced in the large province of drama, and which gave
   us lyric poems that are still the glory of the language--some of them
   religious lyrics, too--gave to the English hymn-book hardly a single
   stanza that may be called hymnic. It is true that the poem containing,
   "Jerusalem, My Happy Home," and "O Mother Dear, Jerusalem" were written
   then; but these hymns are stanzas selected from a long anonymous poem
   signed "F. B. P.," and they did not become hymns till the close of the
   eighteenth century.

   It was not, of course, because of any lack of religious feeling or of
   the lyric spirit that there were no Elizabethan hymns. There was much
   religious singing and sacred music. It was the age of Tallis and
   William Byrd and of other great and many minor church musicians. Whole
   chapters, for example, of the Acts were turned into rime and meter, set
   to music, and sung in the Chapel Royal. Whole books, including the
   chronological lists of names, were versified and sung, seemingly with
   fervor. The Psalms were sung to the tunes common in the streets and the
   shops of barbers, and in the taverns. They were sung in the cathedrals
   and in the cultivated homes such as that in which [26]John Milton was
   nurtured. But from these golden days of English life and literature
   there have come down to us no great hymns; there was, as we have seen,
   no popular demand, no social feeling, to inspire the rich native
   hymnody.

   It takes more than a devout and wise poet to make a hymn; it requires a
   people to call forth poetry of any kind. Especially is this true of
   that most social type of poem, the hymn. The history of poetry and
   especially of hymnody shows that it requires social thinking and
   communal feeling as well as individual gift to make poetry.
   "[27]Paradise Lost" was a poem of Puritan England no less than of John
   Milton.

   It is not by chance that poets stand in groups. The poetic movements
   and the poetic notions which group poets together from time to time are
   not entirely of the poets. Wordsworth and Coleridge needed each other
   and needed the social thinking and feeling of their time to make them
   the poets they were. The poetry of Keats and Shelley and Byron is the
   poetry of the age of spiritual awakening and revolt, of a wave of
   communal feeling and thinking, as well as of the three individuals. The
   New England transcendentalists were poets not merely of and for
   themselves, but of and for the common mind and spirit of transcendental
   New England. Shakspere was the voice of William Shakspere; but he was
   even more the voice of Elizabethan England. If the poet spoke merely of
   himself, and were not the voice of a deeper social mind, we might have
   a Longfellow singing with Pope, and a Dryden singing heroic couplets of
   seventeenth-century wisdom in Alaska or Arizona. If Charles Wesley had
   been living in the time of Donne and Herrick he would probably have
   written no hymns at all; the type had not been developed in the minds
   of the people and the poets. And had he lived then, and had he
   conceived independently of the type, he would not have written many
   hymns, there being no demand for them and no response to them. Ken and
   Watts and the religious revival of the eighteenth century together with
   Charles Wesley produced "Jesus Lover of My Soul" and "O for a Thousand
   Tongues to Sing." When Herrick and Donne wrote, if the people had been
   singing religious lyrics of our poets in their worship, the poets would
   have responded with lyrics to sing. And the people in turn would have
   learned and set up a higher standard. It required Ken, Watts, and
   Wesley to develop the hymn, but it took a hymn-minded England to
   develop Ken, Watts, and Wesley.

   Tethered poets could not write great hymns. There was a prodigious
   amount of metrical psalmody, some of it good, so far as second-hand
   poetry can be good, but the blighting effect of this kind of repression
   upon poetic form and spirit is evident as one reads over the metrical
   versions of Psalms made by some of the best English poets, including
   Milton.

   And thus it came about that while Germany was making so splendid a
   hymnody, the Elizabethan age produced no great hymns. Michael Drayton
   expressed this idea of limitation well enough in the preface to his
   "Harmonie of the Church containing the spiritual Songs and Holy Hymns
   of Godly men, Patriarchs, and Prophets; all sweetly sounding to the
   praise and glory of the highest. Now (newly) introduced into sundry
   kinds of English Meeter; meets to be sung or read for the solace and
   comfort of the godly" (London, 1591):

     Gentle reader, my meaning is not with the variety of verse to feed
     any vain humor, neither to trouble thee with devices of my own
     invention, as carrying an overweening of my own wit; but here I
     present thee these Psalms or Songs of Praise so exactly translated
     as the prose would permit, or sense would in any way suffer me;
     which (if thou be the same in heart as thou art in name, I mean
     Christian) I doubt not but thou wilt take as great delight in these
     as in any poetical fiction.

   It is a tragedy of literary history that Drayton did not express more
   "devices of his own invention," not only so far as religious lyrics go
   but in the broader field of literature as well. His opinion about
   originality in religious song was all but a universal opinion, and
   consequently the native hymn of modern English had little inspiration
   and response such as the great hymnists had had. It is hard to imagine
   what the Elizabethans might have done with the hymn.

   The sweeping corporate fervor for singing, such as had called forth the
   Psalms themselves in their time, was lacking to the Elizabethans; their
   ears never quite caught the hymnal note. Wyatt and Surrey, blazing the
   way for modern English poetry, had written hymn verse; but it was verse
   patterned slavishly upon the models of the Psalms. In sonnets and other
   lyrics they wrote freely and brilliantly for their early time, but in
   this province.

   William Drummond of Hawthornden published in his "Flowers of Zion"
   (Edinburgh, 1620) some religious verse of high quality. But not one of
   these poems falls exactly into the hymn type; he did not attain to the
   making of a single good hymn. His "Ascension Hymn" will serve as well
   as any to show this, and will give a hint why:


   Bright Portalles of the Skie

   Embossed with sparkling Starres,

   Doors of Eternitie

   With diamantine barres.


   Your Arras rich uphold,

   Loose all your bolts and Springs,

   Ope wide your leaves of gold;

   That in your Roofes may come the King of kings.

   To fitting music this poem, so far, would be a rather gorgeous hymn.
   Except for its slight antiqueness, I do not see that it is much
   inferior to Pope's "Rise, Crowned with Light, Imperial Salem, Rise," or
   Addison's "The Spacious Firmament on High," both of which it resembles
   in combined fervor and splendor. But in the following stanza it loses
   the hymn quality of restraint from gaudy decoration:


   Scarfed in a rosy cloud

   Hee doth ascend the Aire,

   Straight doth the Moone him shrowde

   With her resplendent Haire.

   The figure of the moon's hair, while it may be pretty fancy, is a
   patent violation of that churchly dignity which slight practice in
   hymnody would have shown Drummond that the hymn demands.

   A hymn of Phineas Fletcher, published in 1670, twenty years after his
   death, beginning,


   Great fount of light, whose overflowing streams,

   Lend stars their dimmer sparks, suns brighter beams,

   shows another departure from the hymn standard: the lines are too
   subtle. One has to pause in reading them to see what they mean. If
   Fletcher had been a contemporary of Keble he would have found out that
   the meaning, or least some meaning, must be instantly evident. Neither
   the music nor the momentum of corporate vocal expression will allow any
   pause for studying out subtle meanings.


   Cease, then, my tongue, and lend unto my mind

   Leave to bethink,

   says Spenser in his "Hymn of Heavenly Beauty" (l. 106). This
   poem--itself of course not a hymn--makes a clearly impossible demand
   upon the singing hymn; one can not at the same time sing and stop
   singing to think. Thinking must go along with the expression.

   Ben Jonson's "Hymn to God the Father" lacks a quality which the hymn
   type very definitely demands, and which yet is hard to describe
   critically. [28]James Montgomery calls the quality in his own case
   "mediocrity of mind" and with his rare candor thanks God that he has
   it.


   Hear me, O God!

   A broken heart

   Is my best part.

   Use still thy rod

   That I may prove

   Therein, my love.


   If thou hadst not

   Been stern to me,

   And left me free,

   I had forgot

   Myself and thee. . . .


   Who more can crave

   Than thou hast done?

   Thou gav'st a son

   To free a slave

   First made of naught,

   With all since bought.


   Sin, death and hell

   His glorious name

   Quite overcame

   Yet I rebel

   And slight the same.


   But I'll come in

   Before thy loss

   Me further toss

   As sure to win

   Under his cross.

   The hymn is too much the expression of the rare Ben Jonson, and not
   enough the expression of the ordinary folk, to be a good hymn. It is
   devout, musical, and mainly simple and honest. But if we or Ben
   Jonson's contemporaries were to sing it, we should need to pause to see
   what he meant by


   First made of naught

   With all since bought.

   "Use still thy rod" would cause many to pause if they thought what they
   were saying. The last two lines are not immediately clear. Again, the
   poem has stanzas of irregular length; and that would bring confusion in
   the musical setting.

   An injunction by Queen Elizabeth in June, 1559, provides that

     For the comforting of such as delight in music it may be permitted
     that in the beginning of Common Prayer either at morning or evening
     there may be sung an hymn or such like song to the praise of
     Almighty God, in the best melody and music that may be devised,
     having respect that the sentence of the hymn may be rendered and
     perceived.

   But the fact that the law permitted it did not mean that the right was
   to any extent exercised. Even Isaac Watts, as late as the beginning of
   the eighteenth century, while protesting violently for lyrical freedom,
   was careful to state in the headings that most of his hymns were based
   on some part of the Scriptures. Poets had never been limited entirely
   to the Psalms for models. Various poems and other passages of the Bible
   were turned into verse; witness the fact that Christopher Tye, tutor of
   Edward VI and Mary, felt impelled to turn the entire Book of Acts into
   common-meter stanzas--the Acts! But the Psalms held the central place.

   If the following lines of Crashaw, "A Song of Divine Love," had been
   written to supply the need of "a hymn or such-like song" one sees how
   it is not an expression of worship to be used by a public assembly:


   Lord, when the sense of thy sweet grace

   Sends up my soul to seek thy face

   Thy blessed eyes breathe such desire

   I die in love's delicious fire.

   However devout its aim, its style is too fulsome for a hymn. In the
   following lines, "To the Name above Every Name; a Hymn,"


   Awake, my glory, soul (if such thou be,

   And that fair word at all refers to thee),

   Awake and sing,

   is shown an example of personal particularization the like of which is
   not possible in a good hymn. The poet here becomes a peculiar person,
   so that a company of persons could not sing his lines as the expression
   of their common mind. Probably not one other person would either feel
   or have any interest in the doubt as to whether one might address his
   soul by the name of soul.

   It seems a sort of misrepresentation of Jeremy Taylor to quote him as a
   hymn poet; but he wrote a volume, "Festival Hymns" (1665). Not one of
   them is even a moderately good hymn. A master of English prose, a man
   distinguished for sense, and a saint for piety and goodness, he never
   attained to true hymnody. The first lines of his "Hymn for Christmas
   Day" show how a verse may be devout lyrical poetry and still not be a
   hymn; it is a "reading lyric," not a singing one:


   Awake my soul and come away!

   Put on thy best array:

   Lest if thou longer stay

   Thou lose some minutes of so blest a day.

   Go run

   And bid good morrow to the sun.

   The use here of the first person singular mars the lines, not that
   there is the slightest objection to the first person per se, but the
   very fact that the holiday assemblage can say with the poet personally
   that they have on their best clothes destroys the figure in
   literalness. They have on their best clothes, and the fact is too
   personal and obvious to serve as a figure typifying spiritual
   elevation.


   Death, the old serpent's son,

   Thou hadst a sting, once, like thy sire,

   Thou carried hell, and ever-burning fire,

   But those black days are done.

   Why is this expression of the idea impossible for good hymnody, while
   the following expression of it is matchless?


   O Death, where is thy sting,

   Where, grave, thy victory?

   Isaac Watts clothes the idea thus poetically halfway between very good
   and very poor hymnody:


   Say, "Live forever wondrous King!

   Born to redeem the strong to save."

   They ask the monster, "Where's thy sting?"

   "And where thy victory, boasting grave?"

   The first lacks the essential dignity. It carried a hint of the
   mischief and humor of a school-boy's taunt. The last two lines of the
   stanza are too violent. The line in the second instance is a pure
   lyrical cry of triumph, in ultimate words.

   In 1623 George Wither had brought out, under a patent from King James,
   the first approach to a real hymn-book of the Church of England. The
   patent reads:

     James by the Grace of God. . . . To all and singular printers,
     booksellers, whereas, our well beloved subject, George Wither,
     gentleman, by his great industry and diligent study hath gathered
     and composed a book, entitled Hymns and Songs of the Church, by him
     faithfully and briefly translated into lyric verse, which said book
     being esteemed worthy and profitable to be inserted in convenient
     manner and due place into every English Psalm book in meter. We give
     and grant full and free license power and privilege unto the said
     George Wither, his executors and assigns to imprint or cause to be
     imprinted for the term of fifty and one years, etc. Witness by
     ourselves at Westminster the 17th day of February. Reg. 20-1622-3.

   Wither's hymn-book, while it was made up partly of "canonical" poems
   riming about as well as they could be rimed, was made up partly, too,
   of his own original compositions; and as he was now living in an age of
   "Psalms in meeter" for religious song exclusively, he had small success
   with the hymn-book. The people were not ready for the free hymns, and
   he was not himself ready to write successful ones. Not that Wither did
   not write good verses. He did write good religious poetry; and his book
   might have been sold to the reading public had not the Stationers'
   Company resented his having a patent and practically blocked the sale
   of the book. But Wither's poems are not quite hymns.

   Of no small significance, however, is Wither as a hymnist. He had the
   taste to see that the metrical Psalms of Sternhold and Hopkins were
   poor poetry, and he knew that something better was possible. He says in
   his "Scholar's Purgatory":

     No man of understanding can sing many of these Psalms but with
     trouble to his devotion. . . . They are full of absurdities,
     solecisms, improprieties, nonsense. . . . I do not disparage the
     pious endeavors of those who took pains in that translation, but
     rather commending their laborious and Christian intention, do
     acknowledge that, considering the times they lived in, and what
     quality they were, they made so worthy an attempt as justly to shame
     us, who came after to see it no better seconded during the
     flourishing times which have followed their troublesome age.

   The other promising thing about Wither was the strenuousness and
   storminess of his life. Wither was a Church of England zealot, a
   soldier--first for Charles, then for Cromwell--and a politician. At
   different periods he spent much time in prison on coarse bread and
   water; he was deprived of all his property, and narrowly escaped
   hanging. Through it all burned his fire of religious zeal. This is the
   kind of soil and season in which the hymn best thrives. The main reason
   why Wither in his two best books of hymns--the other was "Halleluiah:
   or Britain's Second Remembrancer" (1641)--did not have one hymn such as
   Ambrose, the Bernards, Luther, or Wesley could write was that he lacked
   what may be termed the hymn sense. He had not quite the idea of what a
   good hymn is. He had no popular judgment to pass sympathetically upon
   his efforts and to furnish the communal feeling without which it seems
   impossible for a good hymn to be produced.

   So the first hymn-book--not the psalm-book--of the Church of England
   failed, though it was approved and granted a patent by the king
   himself. Although Elizabeth had authorized the singing of "hymns and
   such-like songs of worship" in the churches and cathedrals, it was not
   until the Restoration that there was any considerable singing of native
   hymns in modern England. All through this stretch of English history
   there was much singing of the measures of Sternhold and Hopkins and
   later of Tate and Brady. At the same time there were many religious
   songs written and set to music; but the singing of these songs in the
   churches was a rare occurrence. Many of the fine Elizabethan songs of
   piety were set to music; Sidney, Raleigh, Donne, and Herrick doubtless
   sang their quite lovely songs, but not in assemblages of public
   worship. Sir Thomas Browne gives one of his religious songs in "Religio
   Medici":


   The night has come like to the day;

   Depart not thou, great God, away.

   Let not my sins, black as the night,

   Eclipse the lustre of the light. . . .


   Guard me 'gainst those watchful foes

   Whose eyes are open while mine close;

   Let no dream my head infest

   But such as Jacob's temples blest. . . .


   Sleep is a death; I make me try

   By sleeping what it is to die!

   And as gently lay my head

   On my grave as on my bed.


   Howe'er I rest, great God, let me

   Awake again at last with thee.

   And thus assured, behold I lie

   Securely, or to wake or die.


   These are my drowsy days: in vain

   I do not wake to sleep again:

   O come that hour when I shall never

   Sleep again, but wake forever.

     This is the dormitive I take to bedward; I need no other laudanum
     than this to make me sleep; after which I close my eyes in security,
     contented to take my leave of the sun, and sleep unto the
     resurrection.

   Bishop Ken composed three hymns--one for morning, one for evening, one
   for midnight--and made it a custom to sing them himself to the viol or
   spinet. In his "Manual of Prayers for the use of the Scholars of
   Winchester College" (London, 1674), he says, "Be sure to sing the
   Morning and Evening hymn in your chamber devoutly." The two hymns were
   published in 1695, and have been growing in fame and power through
   these two centuries and a half. Compare them, "Awake My Soul, and with
   the Sun" and "All Praise to Thee, My God, This Night," with this
   anonymous song of the seventeenth century:


   There was a king of old

   That did in Jewry dwell,

   Whether a God or man or both,

   I'm sure I love him well.


   Love him, why, who would not?

   Did ever any wight

   Not goodness, beauty, sweetness, love,

   Nor comfort, love and light? . . .


   There are so many fair

   He's lost among the throng;

   Yet they who seek him nowhere else

   May find him in a song.


   I love him while I live.

   To those that be his foes

   Though I them hate, I wish no more

   Than his dear love to lose.

   This song has a certain charm about it, but one sees immediately that
   it would not do for the hymn-book. It is not in the hymn-book key. The
   contractions "I'm" and "he's" and the tinge of conversational
   argumentativeness in the use of "why" in the fifth line makes the piece
   too colloquial. The word "wight" even in the seventeenth century was
   beginning to be archaic and to carry a humorous connotation. The last
   stanza expressive of hatred of fellow-mortals is foreign to the spirit
   of the hymn-book of to-day. Hope for the damnation of other beings is
   not a Christian lyrical theme.

   It is not very difficult to say why some given verse is essentially
   unfit for the hymn-book; it is more difficult to say why another verse
   is suitable. We may cite here as eminently hymnic a stanza of Bishop
   Ken's. He himself evidently thought that this particular stanza was
   good hymnody, for he chose to end all three of his hymns with it. And
   his judgment has been confirmed by succeeding times. The stanza, often
   sung at the end of other hymns and often by itself, is beyond much
   doubt the most frequently sung of all English hymn stanzas:


   Praise God from whom all blessings flow;

   Praise him all creatures here below;

   Praise him above, ye heavenly host;

   Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

   Here at last, then, is an example of what the hymn-book of the
   Anglo-Saxon race designates as true hymnody--poetry appropriate to be
   sung in concert by men, women, and children of all classes and
   conditions, assembled for the solemn worship of God. Let us notice some
   of its qualities.

   It expresses in the first place, simply, immediately, and harmoniously,
   the basic idea that assembles folk for public worship. To "praise God"
   is ostensibly what the people have met together for. The rest of the
   first line is a brief, straightforward, lyrical expression of the
   reason why people are called upon, and call upon one another, to
   worship God--"from whom all blessings flow." It is a simple statement
   of deep faith that there is a supreme being, the source of all good,
   the benign omnipotent force of the universe. The line is not only a
   statement of belief, but an O Altitudo! of emotion. It has, further,
   that magic of poetry whereby the words are so broadly meaningful as to
   be the expression for all the persons in common, yet at the same time
   of so specific a meaning that they are the expression of the particular
   idea of every separate person. Probably no two minds will be thinking
   of the same thing by the word "blessings." It may mean to a farmer the
   warm sunlight on his crops; to a school-boy, a happy half-holiday; to
   some woman, that her boy has come safely home from sea; to some one
   else a more intangible kind of "blessing." It is simple, immediately
   clear, and expressive of profound meaning.

   The second line,


   Praise him all creatures here below,

   may express to one mind the idea of the unity of all believers. For
   another mind it bears the idea of religious propaganda, missionary
   zeal, some such notion as, Let it be brought to pass that all people
   will know the truth and will give honor only to what is praiseworthy.
   For another mind it may express the idea of unity of nature, i. e., Let
   us recognize the fact that clouds and hills, birds, flowers, rivers,
   and seas speak of the majesty of the Creator. To another mind it may
   balance the idea, "The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
   firmament showeth his handiwork." To another it may be a call to
   acclaim a mystically known Supreme Being. To another the line is but a
   vague, grandly sounding succession of words that fit an undefined mood
   of elevation.


   Praise him above, ye heavenly host,

   brings to one mind the idea of saints and angels in heaven; to another
   mind the physical wonders of the sky called to witness the might and
   wisdom of the Creator, the stars singing together. To another it brings
   thoughts of his own dead whom he believes to be part of the heavenly
   host. All these meanings and more may be quite legitimately understood
   in the words. Again, the whole passage is a musical combination of
   words connoting great good, and affording full artistic enjoyment. The
   words are simple, clear, rich, musical, warm with emotion, immediately
   apparent to the intellect, and highly provocative of the imagination.

   With all this it is a lyric easily perceived by the eye, and easily
   retained in the memory. A child can sing it with understanding, while
   the most wise and prudent can think over it quite fixedly and long--as
   an infinitely profound expression of the human mind. Grant that often
   the words are rolled out merely because they afford the singer's voice
   a smooth medium by which to float into harmony with other voices and
   the tones of the organ. Grant, too, that this or that one does not
   believe in any God or gods; the words still have something to engage
   his imagination if not his reason. To most of those who sing it it is
   true religion in the form of true poetry. It is lyrical in that it is
   an emotional outcry under harmonious control--control of measured
   cadence and rime. It is the outcry of one person so expressed as to be
   the cry of many. And, further, it is an individual cry so expressive of
   the feelings of many that it becomes a corporate cry. Its terms are
   specific and at the same time general enough to incorporate a variety
   of shades of idea.

   With the latter half of the seventeenth century there came a new form
   of lyrical poetry into the English tongue. All along through the
   centuries there had been much lyrical poetry written and sung, but it
   had not been of the peculiar type which is an individual lyrical
   expression of faith, hope, and charity, and is at the same time the
   corporate expression of assemblages of people. Soon England was to have
   a hymn-book, a collection of native upspringing lyrics, after the
   manner of the matchless Psalms, rich songs for choral expression, yet
   at the same time the expression of the deep feelings of individual
   hearts.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [7] Harleian MS. No. 2253. Edited by the Early English Text Society.

   [8] From the MS. of Richard Hill, 1508-1836. Edited by Roman Dyboski,
   Ph.D. Publication of the Early English Text Society. Extra series 101.
   London, 1907.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV
ENGLISH PSALMODY

   In that strange poetical manifestation called psalmody the Psalms went
   through a test by way of translation into the English tongue that no
   other book of poetry ever experienced, and that none other could have
   stood, attesting in a hundred ways the perpetual vitality of those
   ancient lyrics and their inextinguishable beauty. In translations, many
   of which were crude to the extent of grotesqueness, their lyric beauty
   and their spiritual power still moved deeply the hearts of a whole
   nation for generations. There were exquisite translations of many of
   the Psalms; but the translation in which they caught the ear of the
   English people, that of Sternhold and Hopkins, was not exquisite. Yet
   no other book except the Bible and the Book of Common Prayer ever went
   through so many editions and printings as did the Sternhold and
   Hopkins's "Psalms in Meter." Probably no other book was ever so
   roughly--although devoutly--handled in translation as the Psalms;
   surely no other book of songs ever so went to the heart of the nation.

   The Psalms in meter first sprang into prominence not in England nor in
   Germany but in France, at the court of Francis I. The gallant and
   facile court poet, Clement Marot, was once urged by some one that in
   place of his "profane" verses he should turn the Psalms into the
   sprightly verse form of which he was so clearly a master. In 1533 that
   "poet of princes and prince of poets" began his versification. Within a
   few years he had published fifty-two of the Psalms constructed after
   the manner of his songs. And they caught the French ear as quickly as
   his songs had done. Printed without tunes, they were set to popular
   ballad airs and became enormously fashionable and popular. Soon the
   king and queen and notables of the realm had each selected a favorite
   psalm and set it to a favorite air. Prince Henry the Dauphin chose one
   for himself beginning,


   Ainsi qu 'on vit le cerf bruyere,

   to sing as he rode hunting. This is the forty-second Psalm, rendered a
   century and a half later by Tate and Brady in England,


   [29]As pants the hart for cooling streams,

   The king of Navarre selected the psalm beginning,


   Revenge moy prens la querelle.

   Catharine de' Medici chose one for herself, and also procured a copy of
   the Bible. The king of Spain sent gifts to the poet requesting a
   special versification of his favorite Psalm. The austere John Calvin
   was charmed by the songs, and Marot's wish came true, that the boatmen
   and wagoners and harvesters might make France ring with the pious
   ditties. Calvin at Geneva employed the best musical talent he could
   find and set Marot's verses to better music. D'Israeli in his
   "Curiosities of Literature" describes the consternation among orthodox
   leaders of France when these Psalms appeared in the "Geneva Hymn Book":

     Now the Cardinal of Lorraine found that the reigning court beauty,
     Diane de Poictiers, not only was singing them but following the lead
     of Catherine de Medici, had got a Bible. Having thrown the Bible
     down and condemned it, he (the cardinal) remonstrated with the fair
     penitent that it was a kind of reading not adapted to her sex,
     containing dangerous matters: if she is uneasy in her mind she
     should hear two masses instead of one and rest contented with her
     Pater Nosters and her Primer, which were not only devotional but
     ornamented with a variety of elegant forms, from the most exquisite
     pencils of France.

   Marot under the persecution of the church fled to Geneva, where he
   continued his translations. He died in 1544. Theodore de Beza continued
   the work, removing from Marot's songs any unseemly gaieties and
   fashionable allusions. This book, "Les Psaumes mis en rime franc,ois
   par Clement Marot et Theodore de Beza," became one of the most famous
   books of the age. It was translated into nine different languages,
   including the Hebrew. David Breed, in his "History and Use of Hymns,"
   states that it passed through at least one thousand editions.

   Marot's influence was never so strongly felt in England as it was on
   the Continent, though he seems to have given to the Reformation
   generally the idea of versifying the Psalter. In England appeared a
   book by Myles Coverdale, the great translator of the Bible, "Goostly
   Psalmes and Spiritual Songes drawen out of the holy scripture for the
   Comforte and Consolacyon of such as love to reioyse in God and his
   words." Bishop Coverdale spent much time at Geneva, first as a scholar,
   later as a refugee during the reign of Mary. The hymns of his book are
   mainly from the German, rather than after the models of Marot. In the
   address to the reader, Coverdale repeats Marot's pious wish about
   psalm-singing:

     Yea, would God that our Minstrels had no other thing to play upon,
     neither our carters and plowmen other thing to whistle upon, save
     psalms, hymns, and other godly songs such as David is occupied
     withal! And if women, sitting at their rocks or spinning at their
     wheels had none other songs to pass their time withal, than such as
     Moses's sister, Glehanna's wife, Deborah, and Mary, mother of Christ
     have sung before them they would be better occupied than hey nony
     nony, hey troly loly and such like phantasies. If young men also
     that have the gift of singing took their pleasure in such wholesome
     ballads as the three children in his last chapter, it were a token
     that they felt some spark of God's love in their hearts . . . for
     truly as we love so sing we. . . . As for the common sort of ballads
     which now are used in the world, I report me to every good man's
     conscience what wicked fruits they bring.

   This book contained fifteen Psalms, the Ten Commandments, the Lord's
   Prayer, and the "Magnificat," in rime, and twenty pieces less directly
   taken from the Scriptures.

   Stanzas of Coverdale's one hundred and twenty-eighth Psalm will
   indicate the plain, prosaic earnestness of style of the book:


   Blessed are all that feare the Lorde,

   Worshyppyng hym nyghte and daye,

   Ordrynge theyr lyfe after his worde

   And walking ever in his waye.

   One of the original hymns begins with this stanza:


   O, hevenly Lorde thy goodly worde

   Hath long been kept away from us;

   But throrow thy grace, now in our dayes

   Thou hast showed the so plenteous,

   That very well we can now tell

   What thy apostles have written al

   And now we see thy words opely

   Hath given antychrist a great fall.

   In these uncouth verses we see two patterns of church song: one, after
   the idea of Calvin, adhering literally to the biblical text; the other,
   after the idea of Luther, not necessarily dependent upon biblical
   phraseology. Till the beginning of the eighteenth century England and
   Scotland followed mainly the idea of Calvin.

   "Goostly Psalmes" was published in 1539, and though the ban placed upon
   it was removed not long thereafter the book seems never to have gone
   far in England. Coverdale's power in shaping English history was not
   exerted through his hymn-book.

   But if neither the metrical Psalms nor the hymns of Coverdale took much
   hold in England, there was soon to follow a metrical Psalter that did
   take hold.

   The young king, Edward VI, one day overheard a courtier, Thomas
   Sternhold, playing on the organ and singing "for his own godly solace
   some Psalms which he had turned into meter and set to music." The king
   was pleased. Soon thereafter was published and dedicated to him,
   "Certayne Psalmes chose out of the Psalter of David and drawe into
   English Metre by Thomas Sternhold groome of ye Kyng's Maiestie's
   roobes." There is a copy of this undated first edition in the British
   Museum. It contains nineteen Psalms. In 1549, after Sternhold's death,
   a second edition was published containing thirty-seven Psalms. Another
   edition followed with seven added Psalms by John Hopkins. Thus arose
   the Old Version of the Psalms. Additions were made by Hopkins and
   others till all the Psalms were translated. The title of the edition of
   1564 reads:

     The whole book of psalmes collected into Englyshe Meter by Thomas
     Sternhold, J. Hopkins, and others, conferred with the Hebrew, with
     apt notes to sing them withal faythfully perused and allowed
     according to thorder appointed in the Queenes Maisties Iniunctions.
     Very meete to be used of all sorts of people privately for their
     godly solace and comfort laying apart all ungodly songes and
     ballades, whych tend to the nourishing of vyce and corrupting of
     youth. Whereunto is a short introduction to learn to synge the
     Psalmes.

   Thus came a book, curiously one of the most widely popular that England
   ever saw. By 1600 it had passed through more than fifty editions. There
   are now in the British Museum, dated between 1564 and 1841, copies of
   about six hundred and fifty separate editions of this book.

   The verses are rugged, frequently crude, sometimes absurd, and in rare
   instances charming. They are in the ranks of poetry, one might say,
   somewhat like the tassels of corn in the realm of flowers, dun in hue,
   not very fragrant, and their connection with rich stores of corn not at
   once apparent. The verses lumber and jolt along like a loaded ox-cart;
   but with the jolting one can hardly fail to notice the heart-of-oak
   sturdiness and strength of mind and spirit that is in them.

   Sternhold's version of the twenty-third Psalm may be taken as fairly
   representative, though it is much better than some parts of the book:


   My shepherd is the liuing God, nothing therefore I neede;

   In pastures faire with waters calme he set me for to feede.


   He did conuert and glad my soule, and brought my mind in frame:

   To walke in paths of righteousness for his most holy name.


   Yea though I walk in vale of death, yet will I feare no ill;

   Thy rod and staff doth comfort me, and thou art with me still.


   And in the presence of my foes, my table thou shalt spread:

   Thou shalt O Lord fill up my cup, and eke anoint my head.


   Through all my life thy favor is, so frankly showed to me

   That in thy house foreurmore, my dwelling place shall be.

   The following is part of Hopkins's rendering of the forty-second Psalm;
   Hopkins states in a short preface that he knows that his verses are not
   to be compared with Sternhold's "most exquisite doynges"; and he is not
   quite as good as Sternhold:


   Like as the hart doth breath and bray, the wellspring to obtain:

   So doth my soule desire alway, with thee Lord, to remaine.


   My soule doth thirst and would draw neare, the liuing God of might:

   O when shall I come and appear, in presence of his sight?


   The tears all times are my repast, which from mine eyes did slide:

   The wicked men cry out so fast, where now is God my guide?


   Alas what griefs is his to thinke, what freedome once I had:

   Therefore my soul is at pits brinke, is most heauie and sad.

   The spirit of poetry wore strange garb in those days. But clad thus in
   hodden-gray, she crossed countless thresholds over which she otherwise
   could not have entered at all as a ministrant of hope and courage and
   ideals of upright life. These verses were written before the time of
   Elizabethan splendor, and are a product of sturdy England yet
   untransformed by the Renaissance. In spite of the ridicule leveled at
   them through two hundred years, and in spite of their openness to
   ridicule, they exerted an enormous influence in the shaping of modern
   England.

   Ruskin says that as poetry they are "half paralytic, half profane,
   consisting partly of the expression of what the singers never in their
   lives felt or attempted to feel; and partly in the address of prayers
   to God which nothing could more disagreeably astonish than his
   attending to." [9] But Ruskin says in the same book with equal
   unreason, "The general mass of amiably and pleasantly religious persons
   can no more understand a Psalm than a kitten a Greek tragedy." The
   generations of sturdy folk who sang the plain honest rimes of
   "Sternhold and Hopkins" knew, and felt in their hearts, what they were
   singing. And, whatever faults these folks might have had, over
   amiability and softness were not among them. They knew quite well what
   a psalm was and what they meant when they sang it.

   An idea of the great prevalence and sway of the metrical Psalm in
   England may be gained from details such as a bill for books rendered by
   Thomas Sternhold, royal printer to King Henry VIII. [10] Of the
   forty-four items on the king's bill for books eleven items are copies
   of the Psalms. One reads:

     Item delivered to the kinges highness for a little Psalter taken out
     of one book and setting in another in the same place, and for
     gorgious bynding of the same book xijd and to the Goldsmythe for the
     taking off of the clasps and corners and for setting them ageyn xvjd
     Summa ijs, iiijd.

   This glimpse into the king's book buying indicates that the Psalter was
   a favorite gift-book, and that the heavy but sturdy paraphrase would
   find favor in the most exalted circles as well as among the common
   people.

   Of course the princes and scholars had not so much needed the
   translations. The Psalms in Latin were familiar and dear to the hearts
   of many. The example of Sir Thomas More may not perhaps be cited as
   typical of learned England in his day, but it is significant. He
   recited every morning seven of the Psalms in Latin--Psalms 6, 32, 38,
   51, 102, 130, 148. In the boat on his way toward the Tower--and the
   block--he was singing psalms; and thereby, he told his son-in-law,
   William Roper, he "gave the devil a foul fall indeed."

   But the Psalms were wanted in the common tongue, and the poets from
   Wyatt and Surrey on had been turning them into meter--none so agreeable
   to popular taste, however, as Sternhold and Hopkins. Their metrical
   Psalter was to bring into English familiar life the greatest of all
   song-books, and bring it in the homely honest guise of popular song.
   The Psalter was to be more than merely a book for "gorgious bynding."
   In the Sternhold and Hopkins translation it was to prove one of the
   mighty books of England.

   Bishop Jewel in a letter dated March 6, 1560, says:

     A change appeared now more vividly among the people. Nothing
     promoted it more than the inviting of the people to sing psalms.
     That was begun in one church and did quickly spread itself not only
     through the city but in the neighboring places; sometimes at St.
     Paul's Cross there will be six thousand people singing together.

   These metrical Psalms were set to music by the leading musicians of the
   time, Tallis and Byrd and John Milton, father of the poet. Many of
   their airs are still familiar in the hymn-books. The Psalms were sung
   also to popular street tunes, "Greensleeves" for example, as Mistress
   Ford tells in "Merry Wives." Says Masson in his great "Life of Milton,"
   concerning the Psalm music of Milton's father:

     "The tenor part of York tunes," we are told by Sir John Hopkins,
     "was so well known that within memory half the nurses in England
     were used to sing it by way of a lullaby" and the chimes of many
     country churches had "played it six or eight times in
     four-and-twenty hours from time immemorial." And so apart from all
     that the scrivener of Broad Street has given us through his son,
     there yet rests in the air of Britain, capable of being set loose
     wherever church-bells send their chimes over an English or Scottish
     fire-side, some portion of the soul of the admirable man and his
     love of sweet sounds.

   There are a great number of religious songs and paraphrases and many
   volumes issued, such as, for example, William Hunnis' "Seven Sobs of a
   Sorrowful Soul for Sin," 1559. Portions of the Book of Genesis were
   turned into rime with the title, "A Hive Full of Honey"; another book
   was "A Handful of Honeysuckles: Blessings out of Deuteronomy." These
   titles hint why the sober Sternhold prevailed.

   John Donne said that religious song must not be bedizened. Archbishop
   Parker's version of the Psalms, 1557, had something of that fault. His
   rendering of the twenty-third Psalm begins:


   To feed my neede: he will me leade

   To pastures green and fat:

   He forth brought me: in libertie

   To waters delicate.

   The following lines constitute the first stanza of the "De Profundis"
   of George Gascoigne:


   From depths of dole wherein my soule dooth dwell,

   From heavie heart which harbors in my breast,

   From troubled sprite which seldom taketh rest,

   From hope of heaven, from dreade of darksome hell,

   O gracious God, my lovely Lorde alone,

   To thee I call, to thee I make my mone

   And thou good God, vouchsafe us gree to take

   This woeful plaint

   Wherein I faint:--

   O hear me then for thy great mercy's sake.

   The court musician, William Byrd, issued in 1558 his "Sonnets and Songs
   of Sadness and Piety." The verses are too involved and fanciful for
   hymnody:


   If that a sinner's sighs be Angel's food

   Or that repentant tears be Angel's wine,

   Accept, O Lord, in this most pensive mood

   These hasty sighs and tears of mine

   That went with Peter forth most sinfully

   But not with Peter wept most bitterly.

   A stanza from Sir Philip Sidney's version of the nineteenth
   Psalm--"More than gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also than the
   honey and the honeycomb":


   Then what men would so soon seke gold,

   Or glittering golden money?

   By them is past, in sweetest tast,

   Honey and combe of honey.

   Throughout the Elizabethan period there was a great deal of religious
   lyrical verse, and much effort was spent upon it. In his "Defense of
   Poesy," Sidney says:

     How well it [lyrical poetry] may be employed and with what heavenly
     fruits both public and private singing the praises of the immortal
     goodness of that God which giveth us hands to write and wits to
     conceive!

   A stanza from Francis Davidson's twenty-third Psalm is as follows:


   He feedeth me in fields that beene

   Fresh and greene,

   Mottled with Spring's flowery painting;

   Through which creeps with murmuring Crookes

   Christall brookes

   To refresh my spirits fainting.

   The following lines from a paraphrase of the fourteenth Psalm are
   attributed to Queen Elizabeth:


   Fooles, that true faith yet never had,

   Sayth in their hearts, there is no God!

   Fylthy they are in their practyse,

   Of them not one is godly wyse.

   Another example of religious lyrical verse may be cited here, that of
   Mary, Queen of Scots, who wrote in her book of devotions just before
   her execution a Latin hymn of which these lines are typical:


   Longuendo, gemendo, et genuflectendo,

   Adoro, imploro, ut liberas me!

   The one hundred and fourth Psalm as translated by King James I begins:


   Thy mercy will I sing & justice eke

   With music will I prayse Iehove great

   I will tak heed and righteous path to seik

   Till time thou call me to Thy mercy seat.

   Still shall I wake in uprightness of soule

   Within my house which hallowed is to The,

   Mine eyes upon no wicked thing shall roule,

   For all such deides I hate & shall thaime flee.

   Why it was necessary to turn Psalms into "versification" is a question.
   Why should not the two superb renderings, that of the Prayer-Book and
   that of the King James Bible suffice? Why were the powerful and
   beautiful rhythms of those renderings superseded by the astonishing
   Psalms in Meetre that were brought out in such endless profusion?

   One might be inclined to say that some of this fantastic riming of the
   Psalms was an outcropping of the otherwise suppressed human playfulness
   and frivolity of the Puritans; though the gay Cavaliers jingled them,
   too, not confining themselves to common meter. Of course Psalms in the
   ballad form were easily learned and kept in memory. And in the days
   when the ability to read was less general than now, these rimes,
   scattered so freely broadcast, took root in many a mind and contributed
   powerfully to the righteousness and stability of the nation.

   And though the verses appear uncouth to us, they were effective poetry
   to the folk who made and sang them. One cannot believe that the
   Covenanters would have marched to battle and to the stake singing what
   to their minds was grotesque.

   Poetry is always changing its garb and manner, so that the poetic
   fashion pleasing to one generation may not be so to another. Reams of
   heroic couplets were not tiresome to Dryden and his age, but Chaucer
   and Shakspere were. There is no question that the lovers of the
   metrical Psalms found much poetical and spiritual nurture in them, even
   in such volumes as that brought out by Dr. William Loe, in 1620: "An
   Hymn or song of seuen strains or strings set to the tune of seuen sobs,
   and sighs of a seuen times seuen sad souls for sinne, and is to be song
   to the tune of I lift mine eyes to thee.'"

   One stanza of Dr. Loe's book is enough to indicate his style:


   O God if thou wouldst waighe

   My waise and take a veue

   I could not scape thy rod

   Thy wrath I should it rue.

   Crashaw's translations, published twenty-eight years later, are
   different, as may be seen in the lines rendering: "The Lord is my
   shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures;
   he leadeth me beside the still waters":


   Happy me, O happy sheep!

   Whom my God vouchsafes to keep;

   Even my God, even he it is

   That points me to those paths of bliss;


   On whose pastures cheerful Spring

   All the year doth sit and sing

   And rejoicing smiles to see

   Their green backs wear his livery.


   At my feet the blubbering mountain

   Weeping, melts into a fountain,

   Whose soft, silver-sweating streams

   Make high noon forget his beams.

   The twenty-third Psalm has been translated and paraphrased, we may
   suppose, more than any other piece of literature in the world. It makes
   its way down through English history, expressed variously as the times
   have passed, and as various persons such as King Alfred, Milton, and
   Byron in their turn, and as innumerable peasants, clerks, courtiers,
   poets, and scholars have rendered it, changing as the language has been
   changed, yet bearing always the same happy and sure faith in the Good
   Shepherd. It is itself a water-brook of poetry by whose banks are
   grateful shade and green pastures. To read a single passage of this
   Psalm in a few of its English forms will suggest to the imagination
   something of what it has meant to English folk in town and
   country-side, in cottage and manor-house and palace through successive
   generations. The first of these passages are taken from "Biblical
   Versions of Divine Hymns," collected by Wilmot Marsh, London, 1845.


   And if I go in shades of ded

   For thou with me art, me sal euels dred?

   The Edgerton MS. dated 1270.

     For win ghif I hadde goo in myddil of shadewe of deeth; I shall not
     dreede yuels for thou art with me. Thi gheerde and thy staf; thei
     have comforted me. The Hampole MS. in the British Museum.

     For whi and if I goo in the myddel of the shadewe of deth I shal not
     drede euelis, for thou art with me. The Wyclif Bible, 1380.

     Ye, if I shuld go thorow the myddes of deth, yet will I feare non
     yuel, for thou art with me, thy staffe and thy shepe hoke counfort
     me. A MS. of 1530, in the Cambridge University Library.

     For albe it I shulde go unto the valye of the dedely shadewe, yet I
     fere none euyll, for thou art with me.


   Yea, in deathes shadie black abode

   Well may I walk, not fear:

   For thou art with me: and thy rod

   To guide, my staff to bear.


   Yea, though I walk in vale of death, yet will I fear none ill:

   Thy rod and thy staff doth comfort me, and thou art with me still.

   Thomas Sternhold.

   The version of Sir Philip Sidney and the Countess of Pembroke leaves
   the common meters for more elaborate verse form:


   He me revives: leads me the way

   Which righteousnes doth take

   For his name's sake.

   Yea, though I should through valleys stray

   Of deathes darke shade, I will

   No whitt feare ill.

   It may be said that this version of the Psalm does not add to the
   poetic reputation of these two magnificent persons. Their desire to
   improve upon Sternhold was admirable; but they hardly attained it. The
   same attempt later, by King James I, was for various reasons even less
   successful.

   Sternhold's metrical translation, published at Geneva in 1556, begins:


   The lord is onlye my support,

   And he that doth me feed;

   How can I then lack anything,

   Whereof I stand in need.


   He doth me foulde in cottes most safe,

   And tender grass fast by;

   And after dryveth me to the streams

   Which run most pleasantly.

   The best known translations, excepting of course the two matchless
   unmetrical versions, that of the King James Bible and that of the
   English Prayer-Book, are the famous [30]Scottish paraphrase beginning,


   The Lord's my shepherd, I'll not want,

   and the one of Sir Henry Baker:


   The king of love my shepherd is

   Whose goodness faileth never;

   I nothing lack if I am his,

   And he is mine forever.


   Where streams of living water flow,

   My ransomed soul he leadeth,

   And where the verdant pastures grow,

   With food celestial feedeth.


   Perverse and foolish oft I strayed,

   And yet in love he sought me,

   And on his shoulders gently laid,

   And home, rejoicing, brought me.


   In death's dark vale I fear no ill,

   With thee, dear Lord, beside me,

   Thy rod and staff my comfort still,

   Thy cross before to guide me.


   And so through all the length of days

   Thy goodness faileth never;

   Good Shepherd, may I sing thy praise

   Within thy house forever.

   The old version of the Psalms held its place till the end of the
   seventeenth century, never seriously disturbed. But at this point there
   appeared a new publication which indicated the improving popular taste
   and new freedom of thought, and at the same time the deep-set popular
   affection for the old literal versification of the Psalms. From the
   first there has been much individual dissatisfaction with the
   uncouthness of Sternhold and Hopkins. Queen Elizabeth had treated them
   with humorous toleration. Many attempts had been made to furnish the
   church with better renderings. Among the large numbers of metrical
   renderings of the Psalms, in part or entire, may be mentioned those of
   Sir Philip Sidney and the Countess of Pembroke, Edmund Spenser, John
   Donne, Phineas Fletcher, George Herbert, Lord Bacon, King James I,
   George Sandys, George Wither, Francis Rous, and Henry Vaughan. Milton
   translated nineteen of the Psalms into meter.

   But none of these had seriously molested the reign of "Sternhold and
   Hopkins" until Nahum Tate, the poet laureate under William and Mary, in
   collaboration with Nicholas Brady, issued a complete new version; that
   was in 1696. The New Version, or Tate and Brady as it was thereafter
   known, was dedicated to the king and authorized by royal order.

   It was greeted with bitter denunciation and with enthusiastic approval,
   and yet by a third party with measured approval as constituting a
   distinct advance over the Old Version, and looking forward to something
   better. The Supplement, issued separately in 1700, contained the
   Canticles, six hymns, and many new tunes. This book, added to
   gradually, went through many editions in the first decades of the new
   century, and became a prototype of the modern hymn-book. The New
   Version did not replace the Old; among the more urbane it did, but in
   the country districts "Sternhold and Hopkins" persisted till the
   hymn-book supplanted both versions.

   Conservatives saw in Tate and Brady's Psalter a dangerous tendency to
   depart from the biblical text, and to abandon solid virtue for doubtful
   refinement. The Bishop of St. Asaph wrote:

     Whereas the Composers and Reviewers of the Old translations had
     nothing else in their Eye but to give us the true sense of each
     piece in as few words as could be in Verse and, therefore keep close
     to the text, without deviating from it on any account. In this New
     Translation there is so much regard had to the poetry, the Style of
     Running of the Verse and such-like inconsiderable circumstances,
     that it is almost impossible to avoid going from the text and
     altering the true sense and Meaning of it. For, thence it comes to
     pass, that although the Authors doubtless designed a true
     Translation yet other things crowding into their Heads at the same
     time jostled that Design so that it could not always take effect.

   In the established church as well as among the Non-Conformists the New
   Version aroused new and heated disputes whether it were lawful, after
   all, for the people, especially the women, to sing in church, and
   whether any sort of "human composure" were fit to be sung in public.
   Isaac Watts welcomed it, saying in the preface to his "Horae Lyricae":
   "Some people persuade themselves and their children that the beauties
   of poetry are vain and dangerous. All that arises a degree above Mr.
   Sternhold is too airy for worship."

   The Old Version and the New Version served their time. So far as
   popular favor and influence are concerned "Sternhold and Hopkins" was
   one of the three great books of England for the two centuries. "Tate
   and Brady" in its turn exerted a tremendous influence. But the freer
   and more poetic hymn-book was in its time gradually to replace these
   and all other metrical versions such as Ainsworth in Scotland and New
   England, though nothing is likely ever to drive out the Psalms of the
   glorious King James Version.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [9] "Rock Honeycomb, Broken pieces of Sir Philip Sidney's Psalter Laid
   up in Store for English Homes", "The Works of John Ruskin," ed. Cook
   and Wedderburne, Vol. XXXI, p. 116.

   [10] Published in "Transcript of the Register of the Company of
   Stationers," Vol II, p. 51. Privately printed, London, 1875.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V
ISAAC WATTS

   The great hymns of the world have appeared in time of religious turmoil
   and struggle. The rule would seem to have an exception in the case of
   [31]Isaac Watts, one of the two greatest of English hymnists, and the
   man who more than any other established the hymn as a type of English
   poetry; for the most of Watts's mature life was spent in scholarly
   quiet at the country home of Sir Thomas Abney. But most of his hymns
   sprang out of the days of stress and struggle while he was yet a young
   man. Isaac Watts was a child of religious strife and sacrifice. He
   lived in strenuous times and came of stalwart stock. His grandfather, a
   commander in the British fleet, once killed a tiger in a fight, with
   his bare hands. Leaping into a river, he turned upon the tiger, which
   had sprung out of the jungle upon him, seized it by the head, and
   drowned it. That was the same kind of courage and clearness of head
   that the grandson in his day was called upon to exercise in battles of
   ideas and principles. Watts's maternal grandfather, a French
   Protestant, had clung to his religious convictions under persecution,
   and had taken refuge with his family in England. As a baby Isaac Watts
   was nursed and sung to sleep by his gentle yet stout-hearted mother
   sitting on a horse-block under a window of the Southampton jail, where
   her husband was imprisoned for loyalty to his faith. Something of the
   quality of the soul of the elder Watts is shown by a letter written
   under banishment a few years later to his children. Not a word is said
   about shelter, food, or safety, but, "My children pray God to give you
   a knowledge of his truth, for it is a very dangerous time you are like
   to live in." Mr. Thomas Wright in his "Life of Isaac Watts" tells a
   story of Isaac's childhood which gives a glimpse of an English fireside
   of the time, as well as of an unusual child. Little Isaac tittered out
   once during family prayer. The grave household later heard his
   confession that, seeing a mouse run up a bell-rope which hung by the
   fireplace, he made the rime:


   A mouse for want of better stairs,

   Ran up a rope to say his prayers.

   Isaac's youth was strenuous. The young Non-Conformist was learning
   Greek and Hebrew at eight years old. He was of frail physique and had
   to battle not only for his religious and intellectual life but for
   physical life as well.

   His experience was no exception to the rule that hymns grow best in
   soil that is much and deeply stirred. At that time when Puritan
   strictness and rigor were increasing without the deep Puritan piety,
   Watts stood for gentleness, charity, and freedom. In that age of
   conformity, he was vigorously independent, stanchly loyal to his own
   opinions. In the age of Congreve, Wycherley, Butler, Gay, and Swift,
   Watts was developing a warm and devout religious life. It is a curious
   fact and an added honor to him that out of the most unideal period of
   English history came one of the most beautiful child-songs of the
   world, his "Hush, My Child, Lie Still and Slumber." He stands out as a
   loyal figure in times of very lax ideas, and a gentle and kindly man in
   an age of cold cynicism.

   As a Puritan he is somewhat between the scholarly Milton and the
   untutored Bunyan. Watts was an eminent scholar and man of letters in
   his time and a philosopher and theologian of large following; his
   "Improvement of the Mind" and his "Speculation on the Human Nature of
   the Logos" were famous books. His "Logic" and his text-books on
   geography and astronomy were being used at the close of the seventeenth
   century in the universities of England and at Harvard and Yale. Julian
   in his "[32]Dictionary of Hymnology" says that the "Logic" "was still a
   valued textbook at Oxford within living memory." But his permanent
   literary appeal is of a very simple, if very fundamental, nature. As a
   poet, he might unloose the latchet of Milton's shoe; for sustained
   literary power, he is a very long way behind Bunyan. But because of the
   simplicity and universality of his appeal and the sweet and clear
   soundness of it, he stands out as a very influential figure. It is a
   great thing to have written a nation's hymns.

   Personally one of the gentlest and kindest of men, he was nevertheless
   a bold, sturdy figure and an incalculably useful liberal of
   eighteenth-century England. He was the object of great veneration as
   well as fierce attack. "A moderate man," he once said, "must expect a
   box on both ears."

   Judging by the following stanzas for his poem, "On the Sight of Queen
   Mary in the Year 1694," he was no inconsiderable courtier:


   Her shape, her motion and her mien,

   All heavenly such as angels seem,

   When the bright vision grows intense,

   And fancy aids our feebler sense.


   Earth's proudest idol dare not vie,

   With such superior majesty;

   A kindling vapor might as soon

   Rise from the bogs and mate the moon.


   I'll call no Raphael from his rest;

   Such charm can never be expressed;

   Pencil and paint were never made

   To draw pure light without a shade. . . .


   Secure of empire, she might lay

   Her crown, her robes of state away,

   And midst ten thousand nymphs be seen;

   Her beauty would proclaim the queen.

   In 1707 Watts published his "Hymns and Spiritual Songs in Imitation of
   the Psalms." Since that date, and only since then, have the English
   people been in conscious possession of a worthy native hymn-book. This
   book established the free congregational hymn for the English language.

   By the word "imitation" in his title Watts did not mean copying the
   letter of the Psalms but rather a bold and original departure. The rule
   heretofore for the Psalms in the English was that the original should
   be literally, meticulously followed. George Wither had defended his own
   Psalms as being exact translations "having still the relish of holy
   words." Contemners, he said therefore, "do not only contemn my pains
   but do lay imputations upon the wisdom of the Holy Ghost also. . . .
   And to say any fragment thereof were needless is, in effect, to
   diminish from God's word, upon which follows a heavy curse."

   It is strange that the revolutionary stand of Watts did not arouse far
   stronger and more lasting opposition. It was asked by an opponent,
   "Does Dr. Watts indeed presume to correct and instruct the Holy Ghost
   in writing Psalms?" But Watts's good sense and the lyric charm of his
   verse carried the day against the letter which killeth, for the spirit
   which keepeth alive.

   In 1715 he published another book of hymns, "Divine Songs." In 1719 he
   published his "Psalms of David Imitated in the Language of the New
   Testament." This book may be said to have settled finally though not
   immediately the long argument about psalmody. Watts had taken up the
   fight for a broader freedom in the matter of worship, and championed a
   new liberalism in thought and action. In the preface to the book of
   1719 he makes the important distinction between translating the hymns
   of David and imitating them.

     For why should I now address God my Saviour in a song, with Burnt
     Sacrifices of Fatlings, and with the Incense of Rams? Why should I
     pray to be sprinkled with Hysop, or recur to the Blood of Bullocks
     and Goats? Why should I bind my sacrifice with cords to the Horns of
     an Altar, or sing the praises of God to high sounding Cymbals, when
     the gospel has shewn me a nobler Atonement for Sin, and appointed a
     purer and more spiritual worship? Why must I join with David in his
     Legal or Prophetic language to curse my Enemies when my Saviour by
     his Sermons has taught me to bless them? . . .

     David would have thought it very hard to have been confined to the
     words of Moses, and sung nothing else on all his rejoicing days but
     the drowning of Pharaoh in the fifteenth chapter of Genesis. . . .

     Have not your Spirits taken wing and mounted up near to God and
     Glory with the song of David on your tongue? But on a sudden the
     clerk has proposed the next line to your lips with Sayings and
     Prophesies, with Burnt Offerings and Hysop, with New Moons and
     Trumpets and Timbrels in it, with Confessions of Sins which you
     never committed, with Complaints of Sorrows which you never felt,
     cursing such Enemies as you never had. . . . Where the Psalmist has
     described Religion by Fear of God, I have joined Faith and love to
     it.

   These Psalms are more important as setting a new pattern and
   establishing a new liberal idea than for their own poetic quality. They
   are as a rule not very good poetry, though among them are several of
   the great hymns of the world. One feels in reading these verses that
   Watts could turn out the ordinary hymn meters with too great ease.
   Still, without the practice of writing hundreds of hymns he might not
   have attained to the twelve or fifteen matchless ones that he did
   write.

   His rendering of the nineteenth Psalm, "The heavens declare the glory
   of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork," may be taken as
   fairly typical of Watts's Psalms.


   Behold the lofty Sky

   Declares its Maker God;

   And all his starry works on high

   Proclaim his Power abroad.


   The darkness and the light

   Still keep their course the same,

   While night to day, and day to night

   Divinely teach his name.


   In every different land

   Their general voice is known;

   They show the wonders of his hand,

   The orders of his throne.


   Ye British lands, rejoice,

   He here reveals his word;

   We are not left to Nature's voice

   To bid us know the Lord.


   His statutes and commands

   Are set before our eyes;

   He puts the Gospel in our hands

   Where our salvation lies.


   His laws are just and pure,

   His truth without deceit,

   His promises are ever sure,

   And his rewards are great.


   Not honey to the taste

   Affords so much delight,

   Not gold that has the furnace passed

   So much allures the sight.


   While of thy works I sing,

   Thy glory to proclaim,

   Accept the praise, my God and King,

   In my Redeemer's name.

   These stanzas move along on a level with such seeming ease that the
   reader feels Watts might write such verses indefinitely. Indeed, he did
   make three versions of this Psalm, as of many others, one in short, one
   long, and one in common meter. The long-meter version begins:


   The heavens declare the glory, Lord,

   In every star thy wisdom shines;

   But when our eyes behold thy Word

   We read thy name in fairer lines.

   These stanzas may seem to represent Watts's poetical level. It is plain
   as bread. Here is poesy clad in Quaker brown. But, after all, in these
   unpretentious lines there was found much to employ worthily the minds
   of those who sang them. And out of the labor and devotion exerted in
   the making of all these verses there come some lyrical poems that for
   their hold on the hearts of people have never been excelled by anything
   written in English.

   In 1715 Watts issued what was to be one of the notable [33]children's
   books of the English language. From reading the child-books of Edward
   Lear, Lewis Carroll, and Robert Louis Stevenson, one might--if Watts's
   had not been a household book before these writers were born--make
   various speculations as to what kind of book for children could come
   from a Puritan doctor of divinity, contemporary of Butler and Congreve
   and Swift.

   "Dear friends," writes Watts in the preface, "to all that are concerned
   in the Education of Children." "It is an awful and important charge
   that is committed to you. The wisdom and welfare of succeeding
   generations are intrusted with you. . . . There is something so
   entertaining in rhyme and meter that it will incline children to make
   this part of their duty a diversion."

   Watts's idea of educating by means of diversion and his book of verses
   probably appealed as little to the mind of the contemporary English
   schoolmaster as to that of John Gay. These verses are to our ears
   curiously old-fashioned and didactic for children's poetry. But still
   they have a note that appeals to universal childhood. Song IV begins:


   When'er I take my walks abroad,

   How many poor I see!

   What shall I render to my God

   For all his gifts to me?


   Not more than others I deserve,

   Yet God hath given me more,

   For I have food while others starve

   Or beg from door to door.

   Song V has a patriotic note:


   I would not change my native land

   For rich Peru with all her gold;

   A nobler prize lies in my hand

   Than East or Western Indies hold.

   The third line here is Doctor Watts's expression and not that of a
   child. The first stanza of Song VI, "Praise from the Gospel," suited
   the young Calvinist and the young Britisher:


   Lord, I ascribe it to thy grace

   And not to chance as others do

   That I was born of Christian race

   And not a heathen or a Jew.

   A stanza from Song XII shows that Watts would not have the children
   pampered:


   Happy the child whose youngest years

   Receive instruction well;

   Who hates the sinner's path and fears

   The road that leads to hell.

   And one from Song XIII:


   'Tis dangerous to provoke a God:

   His power and vengeance none can tell;

   One stroke of his almighty rod

   Shall send young sinners quick to hell.

   One cannot say how much practical effect Song XVI, "Against Quarrelling
   and Fighting," has had, but generation after generation has learned the
   admonition. The idea of the last two lines is obvious and simple enough
   for very young children to grasp immediately; but what a world this
   would be indeed if mature minds could grasp and apply its spirit!


   Let dogs delight to bark and bite,

   For God hath made them so;

   Let bears and lions growl and fight,

   For 'tis their nature to.


   But, children, you should never let

   Such angry passions rise;

   Your little hands were never made

   To tear each others' eyes.

   These lines from Song XVII, "Love between Brothers and Sisters,"
   somehow have the ring of true child literature:


   Birds in their little nests agree;

   And 'tis a shameful sight

   When children of one family

   Fall out, and chide and fight.

   From Song XX, "Against Idleness and Mischief":


   How doth the little busy bee

   Improve each shining hour,

   And gather honey all the day

   From every opening flower!

   The hymns of Watts are distinguished by a certain Calvinistic logic, by
   boldness of conception and expression and by an austere spirit of
   reverence. The best known hymn of Watts, "O God Our Help in Ages Past,"
   based on the ninetieth Psalm, was published in 1719. It is given here
   as it was then printed:


   Our God, our Help in Ages past,

   Our Hope for years to come,

   Our Shelter from the stormy blast,

   And our Eternal Home.


   Under the Shadow of thy Throne,

   Thy Saints have dwelt secure;

   Sufficient is thy Arm alone,

   And our Defence is sure.


   Before the Hills in order stood,

   Or Earth received her Frame,

   From everlasting thou art God,

   To endless Years the same.


   Thy Word commands our flesh to Dust,

   Return ye sons of Men;

   All Nations rose from Earth at first,

   And turned to Earth again.


   A Thousand Ages in thy Sight,

   Are like an evening gone;

   Short as the Watch that ends the Night,

   Before the rising Sun.


   [The busy tribes of Flesh and Blood

   With all their Lives and Cares,

   Are carried downwards by thy flood

   And lost in following years.


   Time like an ever-rolling Stream

   Bears all its Sons away;

   They fly forgotten as a Dream

   Dies at the opening Day.


   Like flow'ry Fields the Nations Stand

   Pleased with the Morning Light;

   The Flowers beneath the mower's Hand

   Lie withering e'er 'tis Night.]


   Our God, our Help in Ages past,

   Our Hope for years to come,

   Be thou our Guard while Troubles last,

   And our Eternal Home.

   Virtually every hymn-book of the recent day has taken the same liberty
   with his poem that Watts himself took with the Psalms, the liberty to
   make changes or adaptations. "The English Hymnal" [11] omits stanzas 4,
   6, and 8. It supplies "O" for "our" in the first line of stanzas 1 and
   9. "Hymns Ancient and Modern" makes the same changes. "The Methodist
   Hymnal" omits stanzas 4 and 8; It changes line 2, stanza 2, to


   Still may we dwell secure

   and line 2, stanza 6, to


   With all their cares and fears.

   This is a clear improvement, correcting a defective rime and improving
   the sense. "The Baptist Hymn Book" omits stanzas 5, 6, 7, and 8. It
   supplies the word "Beneath" for the line


   Under the shadow of thy throne.

   "The Plymouth Hymn Book" omits stanzas 4, 6, and 8. "The Unitarian Hymn
   and Tune Book" omits stanzas 2, 4, 6, and 8. The Presbyterian hymn-book
   omits stanzas 4 and 8, and changes "downwards" to "downward" in line 3,
   stanza 5. "The Union Hymnal" [12] omits stanzas 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. It
   supplies "Beneath" for "Under" in line 1, stanza 2, and in line 2
   writes


   Thy children dwell secure.

   Every book examined except two supplies "O" for "Our." Any small change
   such as these which makes the hymn really better would doubtless have
   received Watts's cordial approval. Watts made two other versions of
   this Psalm; the better one begins:


   Thro' every age, eternal God,

   Thou art our rest, our safe abode;

   High was thy throne ere heaven was made

   Or earth thy humble footstool laid.

   Other famous hymns by Watts are "[34]When I Survey the Wondrous Cross";
   "Jesus Shall Reign Where'er the Sun"; "[35]Joy to the World; the Lord
   is Come"; "[36]Come Holy Spirit, Heavenly Dove"; "[37]Give Me the Wings
   of Faith to Rise"; "[38]Am I a Soldier of the Cross?" and "[39]There Is
   a Land of Pure Delight."

   Let us examine one other of Watts's hymns, noticing its style as
   typically hymnal, and noticing prosaically what the hymn means. The
   following is a free adaptation of the seventy-second Psalm, which is
   said to have been written for the occasion of Solomon's accession to
   the throne. The rendering of Watts is as follows:


   Jesus shall reign where'er the sun

   Doth his successive journeys run;

   His kingdom stretch from shore to shore

   Till moons shall wax and wane no more.


   [Behold the islands with their kings,

   And Europe her best tribute brings,

   From North to South the Princes meet

   To pay their homage at his feet.


   There Persia glorious to behold.

   There India shines in Eastern gold,

   And barbarous nations at his word

   Submit, and bow, and own their Lord.]


   For him shall endless prayer be made

   And praises throng to crown his head;

   His name like sweet perfume shall rise

   With every morning sacrifice.


   People and realms of every tongue

   Dwell on his love with sweetest song;

   And infant voices shall proclaim

   Their early blessings on his name.


   Blessings abound where'er he reigns,

   The prisoner leaps to loose his chains,

   The weary find eternal rest,

   And all the sons of want are blessed.


   [Where he displays his healing power,

   Death and the curse are known no more;

   In him the tribes of Adam boast

   More blessings than their father lost.


   Let every creature rise and bring

   Peculiar honors to our king;

   Angels descend with songs again

   And earth repeat the loud Amen.]

   In the preface of the book, Watts directs, "You may leave out those
   stanzas included in the crotchets [ ]." It will be noticed that in both
   hymns quoted in full here the author has inclosed certain stanzas in
   "crotchets" as though his hymn sense told him, but not quite
   emphatically enough, that those stanzas would not do. The hymn-books of
   to-day have left the stanzas out, except for the last one. What is
   there that prevents the second and third stanzas from being good
   hymnody? Is it that the hymn does not allow reference to contemporary
   geographical names? I think not; Greenland, Ceylon, India, and Africa
   are mentioned with fine effect in "From Greenland's Icy Mountains."
   Katherine Lee Bates' splendid hymn repeats "America" in every stanza.
   Why was it that Watts half-way crossed these stanzas out?


   Behold their islands with their kings

   is a good enough line of poetry and hymnody;


   And Europe her best tribute brings

   is not. "Europe" seems to be a word belonging both by sound and
   connotation to prose rather than to poetry. As it is used here it
   breaks the poetic spell. It is too immediate, too "every-day." The line
   brings a vague idea of continental trade and politics. It is somehow
   too plainly at hand. Certain names and common phrases have
   matter-of-fact prosaic connotation essentially. A hymn, for example,
   might say,


   We bring our tithes to thee,

   but not,


   We bring thee ten per cent,

   which means the same thing but is a mundane way of saying it. In the
   next stanza, the description of Persia is not quite convincing, and,
   again, it is not in the straight line of thought to describe Persia;
   that is not the point of the hymn. These lands are mentioned as
   different parts of the earth, to convey the idea of the "world-wide,"
   "general"; this they fail to do, because the lands are too close
   together for the names to give that idea. The Wesley hymn-book revised
   and combined the two stanzas into one good stanza:


   From north to south the princes met

   To pay their homage at his feet

   While western empires own their Lord

   And savage tribes attend his word.

   Another change was to replace "For" in stanza 4 with "To." This is not
   fanciful criticism, making much out of small matters. The hymn could
   not have survived without the changes; as it is, we see a communal
   taste, a social judgment, revising the original and making for itself a
   nearly perfect hymn. The idea developed in ringing lyrical terms is
   that the faith and the system of ethics taught by Christ will bring
   about a common civilization, a world-wide unity, and a prevalence of
   justice, good will, welfare, happiness; a universal realization of
   truth, fulfilment of obligation, and enjoyment of good. Is there any
   better service that a poet should perform toward the spirit of just
   understanding and good will--necessary if the world is to get
   along--than to plant this idea alive with emotion in the minds of all
   ranks of people? If people get this idea into their songs they will get
   it also into their ballot-boxes and their general attitude and
   behavior. If the millions who sing this song imbibe even
   semi-consciously its faith in the truth and its spirit of charity, no
   one can calculate the worth of the old song-poet as a peacemaker and
   justice-worker in human society.

   After Watts had made clear what manner of thing the hymn should be,
   there was a growing diffusion of hymnody, and a growing art in the
   creation of hymns. A view of the state of hymnody in the early part of
   the eighteenth century is given by Simon Browne, an independent
   minister of London, in the preface to his "Hymns and Spiritual Songs."
   [13] He argues for good music and free hymnody in church worship,
   saying there is no more reason for confining the church in singing
   hymns, to the biblical text than for confining the prayer and the rest
   of the liturgy to it. Praising the hymns of "good Mr. Mason," author of
   "Now from the Altar of My Heart," he goes on:

     And besides some collections from private hands, with an attempt to
     turn Mr. Herbert's poem into common meter, these I have mentioned
     were all the hymns I know to have been in common use either in
     private families or in Christian assemblies till within a few years
     past.

   He praises the hymns of Stennett, and continues:

     But the ingenious Mr. Watts has outdone all that went before him in
     the variety of his subjects, the smoothness of his verse, the
     richness of his fancy. The World, I hope, will not do me the injury
     to think that I aim at being his rival.

   The hymns of Browne's volume are smooth verses of simple piety. They
   are strikingly cheerful, but they have not the poetic quality to make
   them last more than a hundred years; they have almost disappeared from
   the hymn-book of to-day. The following lines from his Hymn LXXX show
   his general style:


   Lord, thou art good; all nature shews

   Thee full, and free, and kind:

   Thy bounty through creation flows,

   Nor can it be confined.


   The whole and every part proclaim

   Unlimited good will:

   It shines in stars, and flows in streams,

   And broods on every hill.


   It spreads through all the spreading main,

   And heavens which spread more wide;

   It drops in every shower of rain

   And rolls on every tide.


   This makes the heavenly people sing,

   And fills their hearts with mirth;

   Supplies and comforts everything,

   That lives and moves on earth.

   Joseph Stennett (1663-1715) published in 1679 "Hymns, Composed for the
   Celebration of the Holy Supper." This is important as the first notable
   Baptist hymn-book. Members of this branch of the church were early
   leaders in the development of the modern hymn. A prefatory hymn
   "written by another hand" in the edition of Stennett of the year 1713
   contains this stanza:


   Tho long mistaken, I withheld

   Harmonious song, divine thy Due:

   Yet, better knowledge now instill'd,

   Thy tuneful praise my Voice shall shew.

   Stennett issued another volume in 1712, composed for the celebration of
   the rite of baptism. It would seem that his idea was to use hymns only
   in connection with baptism and the eucharist.

   The influence of Watts spread rapidly. The spirit of freedom and
   progress which was in the air found some expression in these new, free,
   and popular songs. Among increasing numbers of people the newly
   awakening social consciousness found a happy communal expression in the
   sturdy rimes and sturdy music of Watts's hymns. Numbers of new
   hymn-books sprang up to meet the growing demand. There was much singing
   now in England. These books one after another repeated in their
   prefaces the arguments of Watts as to the right of Christians to make
   new songs and sing them in their worship. It was the rule till toward
   the close of the eighteenth century to retain the name of Watts in
   titles of hymn-books, as, for example, the Baptist hymnal edited by
   John Rippon, "A Selection of Hymns from the best Authors, intended to
   be an appendix to Dr. Watts's Psalms and Hymns." [14] To each new
   edition of this book were added more new hymns. A remark by Rippon in
   the preface indicates how far sentiment was swinging from old prejudice
   against singing in public worship, and from the old distrust of new
   hymns. Rippon thought that there should be in the book a hymn
   appropriate to sing after any sermon, to drive the idea home. "A too
   great variety is a thing scarcely to be conceived of." An undated
   edition of his hymnal at the beginning of the nineteenth century
   includes in his preface part of a letter written from Philadelphia
   saying that the book is used in America not only by Baptists but by
   Presbyterians and Methodists, and that the sale has reached over a
   hundred thousand copies. An edition of 1844 published after Rippon's
   death contained nearly twelve hundred hymns. Many other books bearing
   the name of Watts appeared in America; the one by President Dwight of
   Yale met with great favor, especially in New England.

   Of the hymns in Wesley's first "Collection," published in Charleston,
   South Carolina, in 1737, the first real hymn-book of the Church of
   England, one third were written by Watts. The first book from the press
   of Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia was, as has been said, an edition
   of the poems of Watts. This free-spirited writer of songs must have had
   a good deal of influence upon the minds of Americans during the
   formative days of the republic.

   In England and America the work of Watts, who was early recognized as
   the leader, above all others up to his time, in the art of English
   hymnody, still remains with us. An idea of his present standing may be
   gathered from a list giving the number of his hymns now included by
   representative hymn-books:

   "Hymns Ancient and Modern"                    9
   "The American Hymnal" (The Century Co.)       20
   "The Baptist Hymnal"                          145
   "The English Hymnal"                          10
   "The Hymn and Tune Book" (Unitarian)          12
   "The Hymnal" (Presbyterian, 1920)             49
   "The Hymnal" (Protestant Episcopal, 1920)     12
   "The Methodist Hymnal"                        53
   "The Oxford [University] Hymnal"              21
   "The Union Hymnal for Jewish Worship"         3
   Palgrave's "Treasury of Sacred Songs"         9
   The Earl of Selbourne's "Book of Praise"      41
   "The Westminster Abbey Hymn Book"             14
   "Hymns of the Living Church" (New York, 1923) 14

   Uncounted people sing his great hymns; and they have chosen them as
   expressive of basic essential truth, of ideas of right conduct, of
   poise of soul in a troubled world, and of just and generous emotion, of
   charity for all men and of living faith in God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [11] The Oxford Press, London, 1914.

   [12] Central Conference of American Rabbis, New York, 1914.

   [13] London, 1720.

   [14] London, 1787.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI
THE PERIOD OF THE WESLEYS

   Charles Wesley may be said to have taken up the tradition of English
   hymnody where Watts gave over his labor. Wesley was born in 1707, the
   year of the publication of Watts's first hymn-book, and lived till
   1788. A large part of the eighty-one years of his life he devoted to
   the writing of hymns; he wrote more than six thousand. He was the poet,
   par excellence, of the great religious revival, which, hand and hand
   with the romantic movement in literature and the democratic movement in
   politics, swept through Europe and America and left a new world for men
   to live in. It became a common saying then, as in the time of
   Chrysostom, of Augustine, and of Luther, that more converts were made
   through hymns than through any other means.

   Hymnody was a part of the new springtime of popular enlightenment and
   self-realization that was stirring through the world. In America Thomas
   Jefferson had said that he had rather have no government at all, with
   newspapers for the people to read, than to have any sort of government
   with no newspapers. Edmund Burke remarked significantly the prodigious
   sale of Blackstone's Commentary in this country. Much the same service
   that Jefferson and Burke saw the newspapers and popular law-books
   rendering in the field of politics, Wesley's hymns rendered in the
   field of religion. And the office of the hymns was that of popular
   information as well as inspiration; they were as Wesley planned them to
   be, "a body of divinity."

   These hymns came as if at a time appointed, the lyric call of a new
   dawn. Markedly individual, subjective, and, to use a word over-worn but
   particularly descriptive of their spirit, "democratic," they are a
   voice of the age. They ring out enthusiastically in the first person
   singular. To them the Divine Personality is not the distant king on his
   awful throne so much as a spirit dwelling in the believer's heart, the
   immediate present helper, guide, and friend. Their qualities of
   individuality, social warmth, and joyful belief appealed to the
   changing England.

   A high place among the makers of the world's art must be given to those
   who have brought into common possession great vital ideas and emotions
   by way of song. Probably none will say that the art of Robert Burns has
   been less powerful than that of Joshua Reynolds or Christopher Wren, or
   that the gift to the world from the Acropolis or even from Parnassus
   has proved more genuine and vital art than the art of a book of songs
   from the hill called Zion. This book of hymns has lived not merely
   because men called it sacred but because it has embodied and inspired
   lofty ideas, just feelings, and pure motives; its influence has
   permeated general human consciousness and colored human thought as no
   other single work of art has ever done. The maker of any people's song,
   if it is good song, deserves to be and will be numbered high among the
   people's great and beneficent souls.

   The artists have found great opportunity and great satisfactions in the
   service of religion, witness the Taj Mahal, the temple of Neptune at
   Tarentum, the cathedrals of the thirteenth century, the paintings of
   the masters, and the religious drama of various ages. But the church
   generally and the Protestant side in particular has laid much stress on
   the idea that all other forms of art are insignificant compared with
   the inclusive artistry of well ordered and harmonious living.
   Architecture is patently one form of art constantly called into the
   service of the church; yet for two hundred years there have not been
   any very original contributions made to the glory of God and the
   edification of man in the form of architecture. But in the form of the
   popular lyric a good deal has been achieved. With the great temples and
   cathedrals in mind, or with some lovely small church in rural England
   before one's eyes, one might say that architecture has done more for
   religion than the other arts; but considering religious songs heard in
   the world clear back to the dawn of civilization, or hearing majestic
   hymns rolling out from great choirs and congregations or holy lays from
   simple folk at close of day, one might make the claim for song. A
   single song is very small and intangible compared to a mighty temple,
   but the temple is stone, and anchored to one place. The song may be as
   intimate as breath and volant as the wind to go anywhere. The temple of
   Solomon has vanished, but the psalms of David are still with us. As
   masters of the church lyric, Watts and Wesley and Heber are very
   important figures in the history of English religious art and of
   English life.

   Charles Wesley, if he had not done so, ought to have written great
   hymns. With his undoubted gift, he had before him the example of Watts
   and the newly discovered treasury of German hymnody. Besides this there
   was an insistent public demand for new hymns with which to express the
   newly aroused religious emotions of an age awakening, politically and
   socially, industrially, artistically, religiously. He lived in the
   stirring morning of the day that brought the Declaration of
   Independence and the United States Constitution, the new freedom for
   English and French peasantry, the steam-engine, the poetry of Burns and
   Wordsworth, the political philosophy and practice of Edmund Burke, and
   the religious renaissance led by John Wesley.

   A strong influence upon Wesley besides the work of Watts and the other
   earlier hymn-writers was that of German hymnody. On their trip to
   America the Wesleys had met a party of Moravian emigrants and had heard
   their hymns on board the ship. Later in London the Wesleys again were
   much influenced by another group of devout Moravians. It was through
   these associations that the hymns which had sounded so powerfully
   through the German people's history since the Reformation, and which
   had been known and loved long before the Reformation, now reached
   England. Nor was the deep personal stirring of spirit, necessary for
   the production of hymns, lacking with Charles Wesley. The sensitive
   scholar of Christ Church, Oxford, soon came to know what it was to be
   hailed and blessed by one eager throng and cursed and stoned by
   another. A High Church Anglican, by nature and training conservative
   and aristocratic, he was yet charged with the broad democratic spirit
   of the time, and by his deep poetic impulse, to be the singer of new
   freedom and new life for individual and common mankind.

   Another good reason for his writing hymns was that he was a member of
   the Wesley family. His mother, Susannah Annesley Wesley, was a product
   of the best Puritan culture and tradition. Remarkable for her learning,
   her common sense, her piety, and the great force and beauty of her
   character, she was one of the noblest and best of England's famous
   women. His grandfather, John Wesley, was a poet and divine of note in
   his day. His father, Samuel Wesley, a great-nephew of the author of
   "Religio Medici," was also a clergyman and the author of six volumes of
   poetry besides a number of prose works. The father and three sons,
   Samuel, John, and Charles, are represented in the English hymn-book
   to-day. Mehitabel, whose sad story has been retold by Sir Arthur
   Quiller-Couch, [15] was remarkable for her classical learning and for
   unusual poetical gift. Charles Wesley's sons, Samuel and Charles, both
   became eminent men; the latter at the age of eight had written an
   oratorio, "Ruth," described by his biographer in the "Dictionary of
   National Biography" as "not a child's performance, but a musicianly
   work." Samuel became a leading musician of England. Samuel Sebastian
   Wesley, a grandson, was a musician of high rank, known over the world
   as one of the foremost English composers of church music. Thus seven of
   Charles Wesley's family from four generations have contributed directly
   to the making of the English hymn-book.

   Yet another influence was that exerted by his publisher, who was none
   other than that tremendous character, John Wesley. Surely no
   verse-writer ever had a more enthusiastic and energetic Maecenas than
   he.

   With all his inherited genius and with all the inspiration that came to
   him from without, Charles Wesley had the gift of a rich and generous
   nature. More vital still was his mystic's experience of the deep
   realities of religion.

   Wesley, like Watts, wrote very freely and spontaneously, as the
   thousands of lyrics he wrote bear witness. Not all of them are good;
   much of the verse reminds one of a painter's tentative sketches and
   drawings. But had he not freely written so many he might not have
   written the smaller number so consummately well. This spontaneous
   hymnody of the time belongs to the spirit of freedom and wing testing
   that was abroad; Watts, tired of the labored formality in poetry, had
   said in the preface to his volume of 1837, "Many a line needs the file
   to polish the roughness of it, and many a thought wants richer language
   to adorn and make it shine . . . but I have at present neither
   inclination nor leisure to correct and I hope I never shall." And the
   tradition of English hymnody set by Watts was carried on by Wesley.
   Watts praised Wesley generously, saying that Wesley's "Come Thou
   Traveller Unknown" was worth all the verse that he himself had ever
   written; this was of course too lavish praise.

   The two poets are alike, in general spirit and purpose, yet very
   different in style. Wesley came from the old heart-of-England stock,
   from generations of strong and cultivated people: his father,
   grandfather, and great-grandfather were all Oxford men; his mother's
   father, Doctor Annesley, was a Puritan scholar and divine of national
   reputation; Charles Wesley was an Oxford master of arts, a Tory, and a
   strict Anglican. Watts, on the other hand, was by descent half French,
   of ardent Non-Conformist tradition and education, a doctor of Aberdeen
   and Edinburgh, a stanch Independent.

   But their differences are such as to make their work complementary.
   They stand unrivaled in the field of English hymnody except as each may
   rival the other. The style of Watts is austere, objective, and formal;
   the style of Wesley is warm, subjective, intimate. Watts, born in 1674,
   the year that Milton died, was nearer to the time of Addison and
   Dryden; Wesley was nearer to the romantic period. A stanza from a hymn
   by each on the same theme will indicate the difference:


   Watts.

   Come, sound his praise abroad

   And hymns of glory sing;

   Jehovah is the sovereign God,

   The universal king.


   Wesley.

   O for a thousand tongues to sing

   My dear Redeemer's praise,

   The glories of my God and King,

   The triumphs of his grace!

   Even in these four-line stanzas one can see not only clear distinctions
   between the two writers, but clear signs of the differing times and
   schools of thought. The first has the air of the Age of Reason; the
   logical traits are predominant; Deity is envisioned from the
   Calvinistic point of view--"Jehovah," "Sovereign Lord," "Universal
   King." The second stanza has the air of the later period--spontaneous,
   enthusiastic, personal. Compare again Watts's grand hymn "Before
   Jehovah's Awful Throne" with Wesley's "Love Divine, All Love
   Excelling."

   The best known hymn by Charles Wesley is "Jesus, Lover of My Soul,"
   published in "Psalms and Spiritual Hymns," in 1740, soon after his
   return from America:


   Jesu, Lover of my soul,

   Let me to thy bosom fly,

   While the nearer waters roll,

   While the tempest still is high!

   Hide me, O my Savior, hide,

   Till the storm of life is past;

   Safe into the haven guide,

   O receive my soul at last.


   Other refuge have I none;

   Hangs my helpless soul on thee:

   Leave, O leave me not alone,

   Still support and comfort me:

   All my trust on thee is stayed,

   All my help from thee I bring;

   Cover my defenceless head

   With the shadow of thy wing.


   Wilt thou not regard my call?

   Wilt thou not accept my prayer?

   Lo! I sink, I faint, I fall--

   Lo, on thee I cast my care:

   Reach me out thy gracious hand!

   While I of thy strength receive,

   Hoping against hope I stand,

   Dying, and behold, I live!


   Thou, O Christ, art all I want;

   More than all in thee I find;

   Raise the fallen, cheer the faint,

   Heal the sick and lead the blind.

   Just and holy is thy name,

   I am all unrighteousness:

   False and full of sin I am,

   Thou art full of truth and grace.


   Plenteous grace in thee is found,

   Grace to cover all my sin:

   Let the healing streams abound;

   Make and keep me pure within.

   Thou of life the fountain art,

   Freely let me give of thee:

   Spring thou up within my heart,

   Rise to all eternity.

   This is one of the supreme hymns of the world. It has gone to the
   corners of the earth with the English language and had been translated
   into virtually every language there is. The song has become a treasury
   of spiritual wealth. A thousand legends cluster about it as about some
   ancient shrine or about the memory of some gentle and famous saint.
   Countless children through successive generations have learned and kept
   its lines by heart; countless men and women have found in it deep
   refreshment of spirit as from a cool spring and shade by the road when
   tired and thirsty; and uncounted ones have passed out of this life with
   its words on their lips.

   As English poetry, it is characterized by the brevity, melody,
   intensity, and completeness of the pure lyric. George Saintsbury says,
   "The mere word-music of it is fingered throughout in the most
   absolutely adequate manner." [16] If one reads it without thought of
   the tune he is still compelled by its inherent melody. And its effects
   are attained by the simplest and most direct means; of the 236 words of
   the poem all but thirty-seven are monosyllables. The images are vivid
   and quickly drawn, the movement is swift and harmonious, the lines glow
   with life and warmth. In it the hymn-book has found a perfect and
   immortal song.

   It stands to-day as Wesley wrote it except that a single word, the
   subjunctive "be" in the sixth line, is changed to "is"; and the
   original third stanza is omitted. The change of verb-form is merely to
   accord with the trend of the language to drop subjunctives. The stanza
   omitted is as good lyric poetry as the rest, but it is a shade too
   fervent for the steady hymn-book. The title Wesley gave the hymn was
   "In Time of Prayer and Temptation," later "In Temptation." Like most
   hymns, however, it is known by its first line. The Latin vocative in
   the opening line, "Jesu, Lover," is usually printed in the English
   form. Of all hymns in the hymn-book this one has been revised and
   amended probably more than any other; this in spite of John Wesley's
   exhortation in the preface of his hymn-book to all publishers who use
   these hymns not to alter them. "Hymn-cobblers," he says, "should not
   try to mend them. I really do not think they are able." Yet in some
   cases amendment did better even Charles Wesley's hymns. For example,
   Wesley wrote:


   Hark how all the welkin rings,

   Glory to the King of kings.

   This line was altered to:


   Hark! the herald angels sing,

   Glory to the new-born King!

   The changes were made by Martin Madan in 1760, and later accepted by
   Wesley. But the hymn, "Jesus, Lover of My Soul," though it has more
   than thirty variations of the first stanza, has not been improved. In
   the first line "refuge" has been supplied for "lover." The same word
   "refuge," has been supplied for "bosom" in the second line. The first
   personal pronoun has been changed to the plural, "lover of our souls;
   Hide us, O our Saviour, hide." Not one of these changes fails to injure
   the hymn. There has been some difficulty among hymn editors with the
   third line,


   While the nearer waters roll.

   It has been changed in various books to read


   While the billows near me roll,

   While the threat'ning billows roll,

   While the waters round us roll.

   Even "Hymns Ancient and Modern," usually conservative in altering
   hymns, has made the quite dull emendation,


   While the gathering waters roll.

   There is no point here in trying to visualize waters gathering
   somewhere and rolling. Wesley knew the sea and knew what he was saying.
   There is in the figure some reminiscence, doubtless, of the desperate
   storm he came through on his American voyage. But even the great
   hymnologist, Dr. Julian, raises objection to "nearer" as an adjective
   descriptive of waves breaking on a reef or on the shore, the ship of
   course being at sea. This meaning can be got from the line, though it
   seems that if Wesley had meant "breakers" he would have used that word.
   But the poet's figure is accurate and graphic--while the nearer waters
   roll--"nearer" being an adverb modifying "roll"; that is, while
   waters--either as a rising flood, or as waves in a storm--roll nearer
   the deck of the ship. Since "tempest" is mentioned in the next line,
   Wesley evidently had the latter figure in mind.

   The changing of a word or the shading of a plural by the poet sometimes
   makes all the difference between mediocrity and supremacy, between life
   and death for his poem. Of course no amount of mere word-manipulation
   can give the breath of life; many attempts at hymnody published in the
   books are sad and flat because they are merely pious cliches
   artificially joined together--mechanical construction, not warm and
   breathing poetry. In the preface of his [40]hymn-book of 1780 John
   Wesley says:

     I desire men of taste to judge whether there is not in some of the
     following verses the true Spirit of Poetry; such as cannot be
     acquired by art and labour; but must be the gift of nature. By
     labour a man may become a tolerable imitator of Spenser or
     Shakespear or Milton and may heap together pretty compound epithets,
     as "pale eyed," "weak-eyed" and the like. But unless he is born a
     poet he will never attain to genuine Spirit of Poetry.

   Watts, the Wesleys, and Cowper had this spirit without which they could
   not have written the vigorously living hymns that enrich English
   literature.

   Stanzas from Charles Wesley's hymn, "Before Work," are indicative of
   what may be considered about the level of his work. There is a
   suggestion in these lines of the gentle and saintly George Herbert and,
   looking forward, a suggestion of the poetic theory and manner of
   William Wordsworth:


   Forth in thy name, O Lord, I go

   My daily labor to pursue;

   Thee, only thee, resolved to know

   In all I think, or speak, or do.


   The task thy wisdom hath assigned,

   O let me cheerfully fulfil;

   In all thy works thy presence find,

   And prove thy good and perfect will. . . .


   For thee delightfully employ

   Whate'er thy bounteous grace hath given,

   And run my course with even joy

   And closely walk with thee to heaven.

   The lines achieve a difficult thing; they speak of the most profound
   matters with colloquial simpleness and ease, yet with perfect dignity.
   The poem has a tonic sweetness that comes of strength. It has the
   humility of faith in God, but no cringing; the trustfulness of the
   child and the serene assurance of the upright man whose faith is in
   what he knows to be true and faithful: it is the whole-hearted service
   of religion where service is perfect freedom. It is full of a sort of
   Christian independence. How much more the man and gentleman do these
   lines show the author to be, and how much more worthiness of trust and
   worship do they attribute to God than do many of the medieval hymns
   such as "Day of Wrath" as well as many of those current to-day.

   For although the hymns are the very flower of all theological writing
   for breadth of conception and for poise of manner, still there are
   hymns that have crept into favor for a while that are ferocious--really
   of the disposition and manner of wild beasts--or else maudlin or
   plainly silly. For instance a popular hymn begins with the climax of
   unmanliness and absurdity:


   O to be nothing, nothing

   Only to lie at his feet,

   A broken and emptied vessel

   For the Master's use made meet.

   Give this stanza what it hardly deserves--a moment's analysis--and
   picture the pain and surprise of an earthly master whose beloved
   servant suddenly becomes nothing, nothing, and yet manages to serve the
   table with empty vessels that are also broken, ending it all with the
   plain remark the master has got what he deserved. Coventry Patmore
   perhaps thought of this kind of praise in his poem, "The Child's
   Purchase," where he conceives the Virgin Mary seeking to shield the
   Almighty from uncouth worship by hotly berating those who neglect her
   own mediary offices, calling them


   The unwashed boors who hail God to His face.

   Beyond the unconscious humor and slight irreverence of Patmore's
   conception one must appreciate the self-sacrificing disposition shown
   by the intermediary in the act of listening to and intercepting such
   poetry of praise as the above. But let it be said in soberness, the
   more one truly venerates the Mother the more he might know her as
   giving glad assent to the words of the Son, "When ye pray, say, Our
   Father." Wesley's poem and true hymn shows the longing of the good man
   to walk with God, striving always to elevate his soul to that high
   plane. There is no mawkishness nor groveling in the great, manly hymns
   of Wesley.

   Another hymn of Wesley more stately than the one above, yet none the
   less fervent, embodies likewise his great tenet, the immediate access
   of the human soul to the Infinite. The power of the idea is heightened
   by its simplicity and severity of expression:


   Love divine, all love excelling,

   Joy of Heaven to earth come down,

   Fix in us thy humble dwelling,

   All thy faithful mercies crown. . . .


   Breathe, O breathe thy loving spirit

   Into every troubled breast,

   Let us all in thee inherit,

   Let us find the promised rest.

   There is for him no bar to the true seeker after God. The following
   lines, though not good hymnody, emphasize the same article of faith,
   relying more upon the "inner witness" than upon any outward agency. The
   idea is characteristic of the author no less than of his age just
   freeing itself from many bonds of mind and spirit, from the "rule of
   the Syllogism, the Scaffold, and the Epigram."


   . . . No such frigid laws we fear

   Who to the king of kings draw near,

   Boldly approach his gracious throne,

   And freely our requests make known.


   Beyond the inner courts we press,

   Enter into the holy place,

   Sure to obtain the peace of God,

   And all we ask through Jesus' blood.

   Full of animation and color of style and rapt abandon of worship are
   the lines beginning:


   [41]Lo, he comes with clouds descending.

   The Christmas hymn, "[42]Hark the Herald Angels Sing," joined with the
   Mendelssohn tune, is a glorious song. "[43]Soldiers of Christ Arise" is
   vibrant with melodious energy and zeal for God. The morning hymn,
   "[44]Christ Whose Glory Fills the Skies," and the great hymn for
   Easter, "[45]Christ the Lord Is Risen To-day," are the other hymns that
   are not likely to die as long as the language lives.

   With all the vigor of his conviction and the force and splendor of his
   expression, Wesley is characterized by great gentleness, tolerance, and
   humility. His lyrics flame high with love of God, and glow with human
   charity. Through his less known songs there is a constant tone of
   tolerance and of nobility.


   In mercy then to me impart,

   The largeness of a loving heart,

   A heart to no one sect confined.

   Love is his favorite theme; the words "light," "joy," "sweetness,"
   "grace," recur very often, and are themselves descriptive of the spirit
   that animates the man. Below is a list of representative hymn-hooks,
   giving the number of hymns by Charles Wesley:

   "Hymns Ancient and Modern"                    25
   "The American Hymnal" (The Century Co.)       17
   "The Baptist Hymnal"                          44
   "The Common Service Book" (Lutheran)          21
   "The English Hymnal"                          20
   "The Hymn and Tune Book" (Unitarian)          11
   "The Hymnal" (Presbyterian)                   24
   "The Hymnal" (Protestant Episcopal)           18
   "The Methodist Hymnal"                        121
   "The Oxford [University] Hymn Book"           29
   Palgrave's "Treasury of Sacred Song"          12
   The Earl of Selbourne's "Book of Praise"      27
   "The Westminster Abbey Hymn Book"             25
   "Hymns of the Living Church" (New York, 1923) 12

   John Wesley, it seems, was too busy a man to write many hymns, though
   it was he who made the translations contained in the Wesley books from
   the German, Latin, and Spanish. He was an exceptional linguist, and was
   himself the author of Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and French grammars. He
   also compiled and published an English dictionary.

   He was a prodigiously energetic and powerful man. Before the age of
   steam, he traveled two hundred and fifty thousand miles, mostly on
   horseback, though he was a vigorous walker. He was a great reader. In
   his "[46]Journal" there are many casual references to his reading, done
   on horseback, on shipboard, and wherever he could find time. The
   reading done on his journeys included Homer, Virgil, Anacreon, Lucian,
   Voltaire, Machiavelli, Milton, Pope, Laurence Sterne, Ossian. Among his
   favorite books was Law's "Serious Call to a Devout and Godly Life." He
   was author of more than a hundred works, and editor of a magazine; he
   was a proponent of animal evolution--of course before Charles Darwin
   was born. "Leisure and I," he had once written from college, "have
   parted company."

   Dr. Johnson complained that Wesley would never stay to talk when he
   came to see him, though Wesley's "Journal" for February 18, 1774, says,
   "I spent two hours with that great man, Dr. Johnson." Sitting for a
   picture by Romney, Wesley praised the painter mainly for his despatch.
   "Mr. Romney is a painter indeed. He struck off an exact likeness at
   once, and did more in an hour than Sir Joshua did in ten." [17] George
   III listened to Wesley with respect, and followed his advice in
   important matters relating to the Church of England. Wesley was one of
   those present in the robing-chamber at the coronation.

   But Wesley's heart was in the places where he spent the most of his
   life, preaching the Gospel to the poor and unchurched and ignorant, and
   such as had no helper. He was too busy to devote much time to writing
   poetry, though Samuel Bradburn, a friend of Wesley, said of him, "He
   had a fine taste for poetry and composed himself many of our hymns; but
   he told me that he and his brother agreed not to distinguish their
   hymns from each other." [18]

   It is certain that Charles Wesley wrote most of the hymns, and that
   John Wesley made the various translations. There is no way of proving
   that the elder brother is not the author of some of the hymns ascribed
   to Charles. Dr. Nutter and Dr. Tillett think that John Wesley wrote the
   following hymn, because it has only the second and fourth stanzas
   riming. No known stanza of Charles Wesley is thus constructed; some of
   the elder brother's translations have this arrangement of rime. The
   hymn seems to have also a logical tone more characteristic of John
   Wesley:


   We lift our hearts to thee,

   O Day-Star from on high!

   The sun itself is but thy shade,

   Yet cheers both earth and sky.


   O let thy orient beams

   The night of sin disperse,

   The mists of error and of vice

   Which shade the universe!


   How beauteous nature now!

   How dark and sad before!

   With joy we view the pleasing change,

   And nature's God adore.


   May we this life improve,

   To mourn for errors past;

   And live this short revolving day

   As if it were our last.


   To God, the Father, Son,

   And Spirit,--One in Three--

   Be glory; as it was, is now,

   And shall forever be.

   A stanza from one of his translations, Gerhard Tersteegen's "Verborgne
   Gottes Liebe Du!" indicates the quality of his work:


   [47]Thou hidden love of God, whose height,

   Whose depth unfathomed no man knows,

   I see from far thy beauteous light,

   Inly I sigh for thy repose:

   My heart is pained, nor can it be

   At rest till it finds rest in thee.

   "[48]Give to the Winds Thy Fears" and "[49]Jesu Thy Boundless Love to
   Me" are translations by John Wesley from the powerful hymns of Paul
   Gerhardt.

   John Wesley possessed what has been called the "hymn sense" to an
   admirable degree. In the precarious business of amending and revising
   hymns, he changed many of those he published, usually to their sure
   improvement. The hymns both of Watts and his brother Charles he altered
   with a bold hand and with a delicate judgment. One of the fine hymns of
   the hymn-book to-day is that of Watts beginning,


   [50]Before Jehovah's awful throne.

   But as Watts wrote it,


   [51]Nations attend before thy throne,

   the hymn lacked the eye-charming first line that has saved the life of
   many a good poem.

   Wesley's exuberant conviction of the human spirit's right and power,
   under God, to transcend material circumstances is well expressed in the
   sturdy lyric beginning,


   [52]Stands the omnipotent decree.

   That is a notable triumph of imagination and of poetic expression in
   the last line:


   Let this earth dissolve and blend

   In dust the wicked and the just;

   Let those ponderous orbs descend

   And grind us into dust:--


   Rests secure the righteous man

   At his Redeemer's beck,

   Sure to merge and rise again,

   And mount above the wreck.


   Lo the heavenly spirit towers

   Like flame o'er nature's funeral pyre

   Triumphs in immortal powers

   And claps his wings of fire.

   John Wesley's "Journal" and letters comprise some rich human history as
   well as throwing light on the upspringing Wesleyan hymnody. The
   immaculate, wiry little man whose quick firm step and ruddy cheeks and
   flashing eyes belied his ninety years could write, "I never lost a
   night's sleep in my life, nor spent as much as a quarter of an hour at
   any one time in low spirits." Yet night after night for weeks he had
   slept on the floor with a great-coat or Barket's "Notes on the New
   Testament" for a pillow, and long had found it a "good tonic" to preach
   at five in the morning. Arriving somewhere at the end of the day,
   "extremely weary," he found the people "so glad to see me that they
   never once thought of asking me to eat or drink"; yet he adds, "My
   weariness vanished when I began to speak."

   Stones might be hurled at his head; subtler and more wounding missiles
   might be hurled from those of his own class, even from his old familiar
   friends, yet he is calm and reasonably careless. "I never fret. . . . I
   see God sitting upon his throne and ruling all things well." Such vigor
   of life, such rich and ample culture, such comeliness of spirit, such
   bold and joyful faith finding most varied expression in his parish
   which was the world, found expression, too, in verse which will live.
   Lines from his translation of Paul Gerhardt's "Befiehl Du Deine Wege"
   show the quality of his soul and the source of his faith:


   [53]Commit thou all thy ways

   And griefs into his hands . . .


   Who points the clouds their course,

   Whom winds and seas obey;

   He shall direct thy wandering feet,

   He shall prepare thy way.


   Give to the winds thy fears;

   Hope and be undismayed;

   God hears thy sighs and counts thy tears,

   God shall lift up thy head.


   Through waves of cloud and storm

   He gently clears the way . . .


   What though thou rulest not?

   Yet heaven and earth and hell

   Proclaim God sitting on his throne

   And ruling all things well.

   Besides the hymnals of the Wesleys, which did not at first gain
   acceptance among the other religious bodies, there were published in
   rapid succession, especially through the latter half of the century,
   large numbers of collections and original volumes. Foremost among these
   was always the "[54]Psalms and Hymns" of Isaac Watts. Other notable
   books of hymns were those of Philip Doddridge, John Cennick, Anne
   Steele, Martin Madan, [55]John Newton, and William Cowper, the Countess
   of Huntingdon, Augustus Toplady, John Rippon, and William Williams from
   Wales, Thomas Kelley from Ireland, and James Stewart from Scotland.

   Philip Doddridge (1704-59) wrote many good hymns, among which are "O
   Happy Day That Fixed My Choice"; "[56]Awake My Soul, Stretch Every
   Nerve"; "Do I Not Love Thee, O My Lord?" "Eternal Source of Every Joy";
   "[57]Triumphant Zion, Lift Thy Head"; "[58]How Gentle God's Commands."

   Doddridge was a man of learning, of fluctuating poetical gift, and of
   saintly character. Some ideas of his style may be gained from the
   following hymn, based upon the sublime passage in the fourth chapter of
   Luke, which in turn is taken from Isaiah 61:1-3:


   Hark the glad sound! the Saviour comes,

   The Saviour promised long;

   Let every heart prepare a throne,

   And every voice a song.


   He comes the prisoner to release,

   In Satan's bondage held;

   The gates of brass before him burst,

   The iron fetters yield.


   He comes from thickest films of vice

   To clear the mental ray;

   And on the eyes oppressed by night

   To pour celestial day.


   He comes the broken heart to bind,

   The wounded soul to cure,

   And with the treasures of his grace,

   To enrich the humble poor.


   Our glad hozannas, Prince of Peace,

   Thy welcome shall proclaim,

   Till heaven's eternal arches ring,

   With thy beloved name.

   But this is not quite the hymn that Doddridge wrote; John Wesley and
   others revised it. The original second stanza beginning,


   In him the Spirit, largely poured,

   Exerts his sacred fire,

   was dropped, to the obvious improvement of the poem. What is now the
   third stanza originally closed with the lines,


   And on the eyeballs of the blind

   To pour celestial day.

   The figure was, until Wesley revised it, too violent; it suggested
   glare and pain rather than restoration of sight or the break of dawn.
   The line,


   The bleeding soul to cure,

   disturbed the balance of the lyric. The stronger of two ideas, that of
   "cure" here, should not be expressed by the weaker and less vivid word.
   If the poet used "bleeding" he should find a word like "stanch" to
   balance it. The original last stanza,


   The silver trumpets publish loud

   The jubilee of the Lord;

   Our debts are all remitted now,

   Our heritage restored,

   did not keep the main idea of the hymn, and fell away in poetic
   quality.

   In any hymn where there is a seriously faulty stanza, one of three
   consequences is possible: the stanza may be revised, it may be dropped
   out, or it may remain to drag the whole hymn into the place of
   forgotten songs.

   As to the right of the hymn-book to revise or in any way to change an
   author's work there is a difference of opinion. Surely no editor has a
   right to twist a poem out of its original meaning or to add foreign
   ideas to it, holding the author responsible.

   But the hymnal is a book of religious worship and not primarily an
   anthology of various poets' work; the individuality of the author tends
   to merge itself in the common expression. And it seems most natural and
   right to save a good hymn by judicious omission or alteration meant
   only to make the poem conform to the type. Many of the best hymns have
   thus been made eligible. When alteration has been made it should be
   acknowledged with the notice of authorship. In the standard books
   to-day notice is carefully given if any substantial alteration has been
   made. The permanent changes are made naturally; if assembled folk
   accept an expression as their own it must he their expression. The
   folk-mind has thus often changed a saying or proverb to make it more
   quotable and more comprehensible, as for example changing "apples of
   gold and pictures of silver" to "apples of gold and peaches of silver";
   or with more art and reason the lines of Bulwer-Lytton,


   In the lexicon of youth which fate reserves

   For a bright manhood there is no such word as fail

   to


   In the bright lexicon of youth there's no such work as fail.

   Of the thousand hymnals containing Doddridge's hymn to-day there is not
   one that has not helped to save it by adopting the revision pointed
   out.

   Now let us take this hymn as an average fair specimen of English
   hymnody. Let us examine it in detail, somewhat technically at first.

   As a lyrical poem it obeys the twofold essential law of unity in that
   it is single and complete; it has but one theme, and it develops that
   theme in a composition of definite beginning, middle, and end. It has
   further the essential glow of emotion: it is warm, earnest, intense to
   the extent of being a harmoniously controlled outcry. Its theme is a
   contemplation of the beneficent advent of Christ. Its complete movement
   of thought is apparent: (1) He comes; (2) He comes to free and bless
   mankind; (3) mankind will acknowledge and acclaim Him. The words,
   phrases, and figures of speech of the composition are in harmony with
   one another and with the central idea and emotion. It shows an
   admirable lyric brevity of statement:


   Let every heart prepare a throne

   And every voice a song.

   Its phrasing is elevated and felicitous.


   The gates of brass before him burst,

   The iron fetters yield.


   Till heaven's eternal arches ring.

   The thought moves unswervingly and swiftly, as it should move, toward
   its climax.

   As a religious song it has a breadth about it that is characteristic of
   the greater hymns. It states its truth broadly as for many minds; it
   speaks from no corner point of view, and insists on no particular angle
   of opinion. Its assertion is the Advent of Christ. The Adventist can
   sing the words as expressive of his own peculiar belief that one day
   suddenly the clouds will take their places in set order, a trumpet will
   sound, and Christ will appear with an army of angels out of the heavens
   and set up a perfect regime of justice, love, and happiness in the
   world. The strict ritualist may regard it as a calendar hymn for the
   feast in celebration of the birth of Christ. The strict Evangelical may
   sing it with particular application to his own "heart experience." The
   Liberal may sing it as a fervent expression of his belief that the
   human race is moving forward, by evolutionary processes toward a fuller
   and richer realization of knowledge, power, good will, and happiness.
   He may understand by "gates of brass" and "iron fetters" all evil
   restrictions of the freedom of the mind, whether it be of external
   tyranny or of internal weakness and ignorance. Binding the broken
   heart, curing the wounded soul, and the like may mean to some minds
   deliverance from individual distress or evil; to others, better
   education, better social justice, even better medical science, and
   general welfare through universal practice of the principles of
   Christianity.

   Still, however many things the hymn may be to many people, there is
   nothing wishy-washy or doubtful about it. It is an assertion of faith
   that through Jesus Christ--however one may understand it--the will of
   God, which is the greatest good and happiness for all men, is to
   prevail on the earth. We may say that this is a good lyrical poem; and
   the great body of people who sing hymns say that it is a good hymn.

   Doddridge wrote the hymn in 1735. If he had written it thirty years
   later when there was a clearer idea of what the hymn-type demands, the
   revisions would probably not have been left to other hands. A more
   nearly perfect hymn of his is the following:


   How gentle God's commands,

   How kind his precepts are!

   Come cast your burden on the Lord,

   And trust his constant care.


   Beneath his watchful eye,

   His saints securely dwell;

   The hand that bears all nature up

   Shall guard his children well.


   Why should this anxious load

   Press down your weary mind?

   Haste to your Heavenly Father's throne,

   And sweet refreshment find.


   His goodness stands approved,

   Unchanged from day to day;

   I'll drop my burden at his feet

   And bear a song away.

   The second stanza began originally,


   While Providence supports

   Let saints securely dwell.

   One does not have to search long for the reason why the hymn sense
   accepted the change. If the idea of the stanza is the guardianship of
   Providence, "watchful eye" is more appropriate, as it is more specific
   and concrete.

   This hymn is simple in expression; swift, animated, sincere. There are
   few songs with a finer climax than that in the last stanza. One feels
   that the poem is an artistic expression of honest, true religion. It
   has a mildness of spirit that contrasts with the controversial time in
   which it was published, 1755. That may be why many of the collections
   of the eighteenth century omitted it.

   One of Whitfield's Methodist converts, John Fawcett, became minister of
   a small Baptist church at Waingate, in Yorkshire. When he had become a
   distinguished preacher there came repeated calls for him to go up to
   London. But like Chaucer's and Goldsmith's poor parsons he chose to
   stay with his country charge. At last, however, when under urgent
   pressure he had decided that it was his duty to go, and his goods were
   on the wagon and he was ready to start, he saw that many of his humble
   flock were weeping. He ordered the wagons to turn back, the story goes;
   and he went into his house and wrote what was to become one of the
   famous hymns of the language, "Blest Be the Tie That Binds." He stayed
   in Yorkshire till his death in 1817 at the age of seventy-eight. Though
   he was a considerable writer in his day, and though he wrote as many as
   169 hymns, none of them matches this one:


   Blest be the tie that binds

   Our hearts in Christian love;

   The fellowship of kindred minds

   Is like to that above.


   Before our father's throne,

   We pour our ardent prayers;

   Our fears, our hopes, our aims are one,

   Our comforts and our cares.


   We share our mutual woes,

   Our mutual burdens bear;

   And often for each other flows

   A sympathizing tear.


   When we asunder part,

   It gives us inward pain;

   But we shall still be joined in heart,

   And hope to meet again.


   This glorious hope revives

   Our courage by the way;

   While each in expectation lives,

   And longs to see the day.


   From sorrow, toil and pain,

   And sin we shall be free;

   And perfect love and friendship reign

   Through all eternity.

   It is easy to believe that this gentle and neighborly hymn, sung year
   in and year out over the English-speaking world, has had influence in
   making for charity, harmony, and happiness of life at more than one
   time and in more than one community. One can imagine many a person,
   under a weight of grief and other kinds of trouble, taking heart at the
   latter verses of the hymn. And it is practically useful for man to have
   his hope renewed. "Sweet hope is his companion," says Plato in the
   first book of the "Republic," "cheering his heart, the nurse of his
   age--hope which more than aught else steers the capricious will of
   mortal man." There is a good deal of faith, hope, and charity to be
   found in these simple verses.

   Let me cite this hymn further as evidence that there is such a thing as
   the practical ministry of poetry in ordinary life. I speak in the first
   person because that is the best way to give the evidence. In the negro
   section of the old graveyard at Chapel Hill one afternoon I saw a group
   of village negroes holding the funeral of an old man who had been among
   them a sage and a shoemaker and good neighbor. These humble folk closed
   their service of burial standing around the grave and singing the
   verses of Dr. John Fawcett, written in Yorkshire in 1772. I can
   remember yet the peculiar richness of their voices in the phrase "this
   glorious hope revives," and the plaintive peacefulness and the light in
   their faces as they sang "and hope to meet again." I am entirely sure
   that the combination of the words and music was worth a great deal to
   those negroes in the practical service of making them happier and
   better men and women.

   Edward Perronet (1726-92), a descendant of French Protestant refugees,
   son of an Anglican priest, supporter of John Wesley--later a friendly
   opponent, a chaplain to the Countess of Huntington, issued a volume,
   "Occasional Verses, Moral and Sacred, Published for the Instruction and
   Amusement of the Candidly Serious and Religious," [19] which contains
   one of the most popular hymns:


   All hail the power of Jesus' name,

   Let angels prostrate fall;

   Bring forth the royal diadem,

   And crown him Lord of all.

   Every stanza of the hymn, except the fourth,


   Sinners, whose love can ne'er forget

   The wormwood and the gall,

   Go spread your trophies at his feet,

   And crown him Lord of all,

   has been altered. The last stanza was written by another hand, probably
   that of Rippon. Some of the alterations are inconsequential; most of
   them make toward betterment of the poem as a hymn. For example, the
   stanza,


   Let every kindred, every tribe,

   On this terrestrial ball,

   To him all majesty ascribe,

   And crown him Lord of all,

   originally read,


   Let ev'ry tribe and ev'ry tongue,

   Throughout this earthly ball,

   Unite in one harmonious song,

   And crown him Lord of all.

   Artistic omission was exercised in the case of these two stanzas:


   Let high-born seraphs tune the lyre,

   And as they tune it, fall

   Before his face who tunes their choir,

   And crown him Lord of all.


   Hail him, ye heirs of David's line,

   Whom David Lord did call;

   The God incarnate, man Divine,

   And crown him Lord of all.

   John Wesley had a stout theological opponent in Augustus Toplady. Since
   the time when St. Peter and St. Paul disagreed so hotly, Christian
   leaders have found it necessary not only to fight the world, the flesh,
   and the devil, but sometimes to fight one another. A stubborn
   controversy between these brother priests of the Church of England over
   the doctrine of election, in which they disputed with remarkable heat,
   seems partly to have fired the emotion that blazed out in one of the
   greatest hymns of the world, "Rock of Ages." Toplady had published a
   hymn beginning with these words:


   My name from the palm of his hand

   Eternity cannot erase.

   Impressed on his heart it remains

   In marks of indelible grace:

   Yes! I to the end shall endure

   As sure as the earnest is given;

   More happy, but not more secure

   The glorified spirits of heaven.

   Wesley called him "a vain boaster," and the two exchanged a good deal
   of argument peppered with invective. In his "Gospel Magazine," March,
   1776, Toplady published an essay against the Arminians. Comparing the
   "debt of sin" to the national debt, he showed how that "at ten years
   old, each of us is chargeable with 315 millions, and 36 thousand
   sins--, at twenty with 630 millions, and 720 thousand . . . At eighty
   with 2522 millions and 880 thousand." "When," continues the writer,
   "shall We be able to pay off this debt? Never." Then follows a heated
   passage, at the end of which is a poem entitled "A Living and Dying
   Prayer for the Holiest Believer in the world":


   Rock of ages, cleft for me,

   Let me hide myself in thee.

   Let the water and the blood,

   From thy wounded side which flowed,

   Be of sin the double cure,

   Save from wrath and make me pure.


   Could my tears forever flow,

   Could my zeal no languor know,

   These for sin could not atone;

   Thou must save, and thou alone.

   In my hand no price I bring;

   Simply to the cross I cling.


   While I draw this fleeting breath,

   When my eyes are closed in death,

   When I rise to worlds unknown,

   And behold thee on thy throne,

   Rock of ages, cleft for me,

   Let me hide myself in thee.

   It is a grand hymn; there are few poems more generally familiar and
   more treasured in the affections of the people than this. For example,
   ten thousand people and more according to press accounts gathered
   lately on the wild hillside where tradition says the poem was written,
   to celebrate the memory of the author. The fact that the Prince Consort
   Albert repeated the hymn as he died helped of course to spread its fame
   over the British Empire; but that is only a detail of its history, a
   symbol of its hold upon the world.

   It is notable, and yet, as one considers it, not strange, that among
   the very few hymns that take rank with this one, three others, namely,
   "Jesus, Lover of My Soul," "Lead Kindly Light," and "Nearer My God to
   Thee," have precisely the same theme, and are built on the same pattern
   and in the same poetic mood. Each opens with the cry of the soul for
   divine help; each reiterates the idea of human insufficiency; and each
   closes with a gleam of exaltation. Wesley's hymn closes:


   Spring thou up within my heart,

   Rise to all eternity.

   That of Mrs. Adams:


   Or if on joyful wing,

   Cleaving the sky,

   Sun, moon and stars forgot,

   Upwards I fly,

   Still all my songs shall be

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!

   And that of Newman:


   And with the morn, those angel faces smile

   Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.

   It is illuminating in the study of poetry to read "Rock of Ages" in its
   original setting and to see how the cold and storm of Toplady's hard
   disputation changes to lyric fair weather with the first line of the
   hymn; the title with its ironic thrust at theological antagonists, even
   though its fervor almost raises it to the plane of poetry, is bitter,
   and does not accord with the lyric sweetness of the hymn. It belongs
   clearly to the prose discourse, and has therefore been dropped.

   It may be noted here that most of the titles given hymns by their
   authors have been dropped as not belonging to the lyric; the hymns are
   almost invariably known by the first line, or part of the first line.
   Wesley's "Depths of Mercy" was entitled "After a Relapse into Sin";
   "Jesu the Name High over All" was headed "After Preaching in a Church";
   "Come O Thou Traveller Unknown" was "Wrestling Jacob"; "Lo on a Narrow
   Neck of Land" was "An Hymn for Seriousness." Addison's title for "The
   Spacious Firmament on High" was "The Right Means to Strengthen Faith."
   None of the three titles remain which Newman gave in succession to
   "Lead Kindly Light." Toplady's "If on a Quiet Sea," the only other hymn
   by which he is remembered, he called "Weak Believers Encouraged"; he
   later modified the title of his great hymn to "A Living and Dying
   Prayer."

   "Rock of Ages" has been subject to a great many alterations. The text
   was rearranged with several changes of phrase by Thomas Cotterill, for
   his "Selection of Psalms and Hymns," 1815. One obviously necessary
   change was that of the second line:


   When my eye-strings break in death.

   The best emendation is:


   When mine eyes shall close in death.

   Others are:


   When my eyelids close in death,

   When my heart-strings break in death,

   When my eyelids sink in death.

   The "Catholic Hymn Book" [20] alters the first line to


   Rock of Ages, rent for me.

   The hymn did not become widely known for fifty years after its
   publication. Now there are few hymnals or collections of representative
   songs that do not give it a place.

   As a lyrical poem "Rock of Ages" will hold its own compared with great
   lyrics of other types. Its energy and color, its forceful and vivid
   figures, its rhythm, its unity of thought and structure, sincerity,
   harmony--all this reveals good art, that is, powerful impulse under
   strict, wise discipline. Notice its balance of austerity and fervor, of
   dignity and tenderness. The images implying the immanence, the
   permanence, and the majesty of God over the stretches of time and place
   mingle in the same tense lines with the most intimate personal appeal:


   When I soar through worlds unknown--

   See thee on thy judgment throne--

   Rock of Ages, cleft for me;

   Let me hide myself in thee.

   With all this, it is, to revert to the title, a living prayer for the
   humblest sinner as well as for the holiest believer.

   William Cowper, though he is the greatest of English poets who have, to
   any large degree, devoted their talent to writing hymns, is not the
   greatest hymn-poet. The tone of the "Olney Hymns," which he and John
   Newton began in 1771 and published in 1779, is that of combined gloom,
   delicacy, and rapt devotion. Cowper's "[59]O for a Closer Walk with
   God"; "[60]Sometimes a Light Surprises"; "[61]There Is a Fountain
   Filled with Blood"; "[62]God Moves in a Mysterious Way" are among his
   best hymns. "[63]Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken"; "[64]How Tedious
   and Tasteless the Hours"; "[65]Amazing Grace! How Sweet the Sound";
   "[66]How Sweet the Name of Jesus Sounds"; "[67]Safely through Another
   Week" are among Newton's best. In writing these best hymns Newton
   allowed his poetic gift to overrule his poetic theory, which as stated
   in the preface was that "the imagery and coloring of poetry if admitted
   at all, should be admitted very sparingly." His theory was nearer to
   the plodding rimes of Sternhold and Hopkins, his practice happily
   nearer to the Psalms so full of color and imagery.

   The peculiar distrust of poetry by men like Newton was partly due to
   their grim, stern traits of character. But it was also partly due to
   perverse traits of poetry in their day. Poetry had fallen in with bad
   company; or rather bad company had fallen in with poetry. Edward Young,
   the author of "[68]Night Thoughts," in his last poem, "Resignation,"
   expresses the wish that poetry might find a new and better theme:


   And in the age of gaudy guilt

   Gay folly's flood restrain.

   He expresses a Wordsworthian idea that one office of poetry is to
   inspire ideas which shall


   Amidst the storms of life support

   A calm, unshaken mind.

   Cowper in his "Table Talk" says that the poesy of his day, instead of
   calling men to share "divine delight,"


   Distorted from its use and just design,

   To make the pitiful possessor shine,

   To purchase at the fool-frequented fair,

   Of vanity a wreath herself to wear

   Is profanation of the basest kind. . . .

   If flattery, folly, lust, employ the pen;

   If acrimony, slander, and abuse

   Give it a charge to blacken and traduce,

   if this, says Cowper, is the office of poetry we might better cry:


   Hail Sternhold, then, and Hopkins hail!

   A man of the taste, culture, and rich imaginative nature of Cowper must
   have thought the state of England's poetry then to be very low if he
   contemplated renouncing it to return to Sternhold and Hopkins for
   poetic example and theory.


   Pity Religion has so seldom found

   A skillful guide into poetic ground;

   The flowers would spring where'er she deigned to stray,

   And every muse attend her on her way;

   Virtue indeed meets many a rhyming friend

   And many a compliment politely penned;

   But unattired in that becoming vest

   Religion weaves for her, and half undrest,

   Stands in the desert shivering and forlorn,

   A wintry figure like a withered thorn.

   Cowper is not asserting here that poetry should devote itself
   exclusively or chiefly to "sacred" themes, using the word in its narrow
   sense. One might as well contend that all the masons and carpenters
   should build only "sacred" buildings. But he says:


   Satire has long since done his best; and curst

   And loathsome Ribaldry done his worst.

   Fancy has sported all her powers away

   In tales, in trifles, and in children's play,

   It is the sad complaint, and almost true,

   Whate'er we write we bring forth nothing new.

   'Twere new indeed to have a bard, on fire,

   Touched with a coal from heaven, assume the lyre.

   And tell the world still kindling as he sung,

   With more than mortal music on his tongue,

   That He who dies below, and reigns above

   Inspires the song, and that his name is Love.

   These lines are a definite plea for a kind of song that we call a hymn.
   It expresses a desire that had been stirring among the poets as well as
   among common people for a lively spontaneous lyrical expression of
   religious faith and aspiration. The greater poets had felt the
   stirring.

   Even Dryden had turned the "Te Deum" into heroic couplets, thus
   bringing this and other Latin hymns into the poetic form of his day.
   Pope had placed at the end of his "Essay on Man" "A Universal Prayer,"
   which was almost a hymn.

   The first stanza, for example, is hymnal:


   Father of all, in every age

   In every clime adored

   By saint, by savage and by sage,

   Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!

   But the following stanza is not good hymnody, though it may be good
   poetry and is good Christianity:


   Let not this weak unknowing hand

   Presume thy bolts to throw

   And deal damnation round the land

   On each I judge thy foe.

   If the last two lines of this stanza are lyric, they are not
   hymnologically lyric. "Damnation" is not quite a hymn word. It is hard
   to imagine any situation in which "deal damnation round the land" could
   be appropriately sung by a group of men, women, and children gathered
   for worship.

   The following are good hymn lines, and show that Pope might have been a
   notable hymnist:


   Teach me to feel another's woe,

   To hide that fault I see.

   That mercy I to others show

   That mercy show to me.

   To thee whose temple is all space,

   Whose altar, earth, sea, skies!

   One chorus let all being raise,

   All nature incense rise!

   These lines show the stirring of English hymnody among these larger
   poets.

   As Pope had ended his "Essay on Man" with a lyrical religious summary,
   James Thomson closed his "Seasons" with a "Hymn." The first lines are:


   These as they change, Almighty Father! these

   Are but the varied God. The rolling year

   Is full of thee.

   It is a noble poem, but it is not the type of poetry that the hymn-book
   contains.

   Shenstone left no attempted hymns, but he found sweetness even in the
   rugged Sternhold. In "The Schoolmistress" he gives a picture of rural
   England piety:


   Here oft the dame, on Sabbath's decent eve

   Hymned such psalms as Sternhold forth did mete;

   If winter 'twere, she to her hearth did cleave,

   But in her garden found a summer seat;

   Sweet melody! to hear her then repeat

   How Israel's sons . . .

   For she was just and friend to virtuous lore.

   Robert Burns later in his poetry pictures the charm and force of hymns,
   though he never wrote a very good one. His vivid picture of the
   Scottish family gathered at the fireside singing the hymns of Scotland
   shows that he loved these hymns; he believed that


   From scenes like these old Scotia's grandeur springs.

   The following quatrain, "On Taking Leave at a Place in the Highlands,"
   may indicate, better than pages of speculation about it, why he wrote
   no successful hymns:


   When death's dark stream I ferry o'er,

   A time that surely shall come,

   In heaven itself, I'll ask no more

   Than just a highland welcome.

   One refuses to believe that he did not find it; but one sees that this
   lyric hope is not exalted enough, or at any rate not highly enough
   expressed, for sober folk to sing at kirk on the Sabbath day. Burns was
   not a hymnist. His "Prayer on the Prospect of Death" is an expression
   for one person only, not for a group, as the first stanza will show:


   O thou unknown, Almighty cause

   Of all my hope and fear,

   In whose dread presence ere an hour

   Perhaps I must appear!

   Burns's rendering of the "Nineteenth Psalm" is far inferior to Watts's;
   as far inferior one might say as Dr. Watts's love poem, had he left
   one, would have been to Burns's "O My Luve's Like a Red, Red Rose":


   O thou the first and greatest Friend

   Of all the human race!

   Whose strong right hand has ever been

   Their stay and dwelling place.

   Anne Steele, "Theodosia" (1716-79), is in point of time the first woman
   writer of English hymns. She was the daughter of a Baptist preacher.
   She was never married, and she lived quietly all her days in a quiet
   town. Her best hymn is:


   Father, whate'er of earthly bliss

   Thy sovereign will denies,

   Accepted at the throne of grace

   Let this petition rise:


   Give me a calm and thankful heart,

   From every murmur free;

   The blessings of thy grace impart

   Which makes me live to thee.


   Let the sweet hope that thou art mine,

   My life and death attend,

   Thy presence through my journey shine

   And crown my journey's end.

   The "Sacred Songs" of Thomas Moore, published in 1815, though they were
   written for hymns, each being provided with an appropriate air, are not
   hymns as the hymn-book understands the term. The galloping meters and
   peculiar fancies are not consonant with hymnody. There is among these
   poems, however, one exception, though it was largely revised before it
   could be said to fit the hymn type:


   Come, ye disconsolate, where'er you languish,

   Come at God's altar, fervently kneel;

   Here bring your wounded hearts, here tell your anguish;

   "Earth hath no sorrow that Heaven cannot heal."


   Joy of the desolate, Light of the straying,

   Hope when all others die, fadeless and pure,

   Here speaks the comforter, in God's name saying--

   "Earth hath no sorrow that Heaven cannot cure."


   Go ask the infidel what boon he brings us,

   What charm for aching hearts he can reveal,

   Sweet as that heavenly promise Hope sings us

   "Earth hath no sorrow that God cannot heal."

   Now, the type of verse called the hymn is as strict as the sonnet in
   its requirements; only the requirements are different and less
   tangible. This poem of Moore's as it stands does not meet them. Before
   consulting the hymn-book, one may glance over Moore's original poem and
   mark certain changes that the hymn-book is sure to demand before the
   piece is admitted.

   The first line is good, magnificently good hymnody, except for its
   grammatical discord. The hymn book will choose between the archaic "ye"
   and "you," probably choosing the archaic form changing "has" in the
   last line of each stanza to "hath." The first half of the second line
   scans too roughly; one measure is lacking. The first line of the third
   stanza is a challenge to an argument. And while the great hymners,
   Chrysostom, Ambrose, Thomas Aquinas, Luther, Watts, Wesley, Keble, and
   the rest, have usually been ready enough to debate, their hymns, being
   lyrical, have not been the vehicle of argument. Good hymns do not
   argue. Another fault with the last stanza--not so slight, either, as it
   would at first appear--is that there is no cesura readily apparent in
   the third line.

   The composition as a genuine hymn was first published [21] in 1832 in a
   book entitled "Spiritual Songs for Social Worship," with alterations,
   and with the last stanza supplanted by a new one, probably written by
   Thomas Hastings, who was one of the editors of the book. In the first
   line "you" was changed to "ye." The second line now reads:


   Come to the mercy seat; fervently kneel.

   The second stanza was altered thus:


   Joy of the desolate, light of the straying,

   Hope of the penitent, fadeless and pure;

   Here speaks the comforter, tenderly saying,

   "Earth hath no sorrow that Heaven cannot cure."

   The hymn closes with the supplied stanza:


   Here see the bread of life; see waters flowing

   Forth from the throne of God, pure from above;

   Come to the feast of love; come ever knowing

   Earth hath no sorrow but heaven can remove.

   "Hymns Ancient and Modern" and "The English Hymnal," both conservative
   about accepting "amendments," do not include this hymn probably because
   it would, of course, not do without some kind of amendment. Most of the
   American hymn-books do include it, assigning its authorship jointly to
   Moore and Hastings. In this I think the American books are right. Hymns
   are, after all, partially folk-poetry, and of so impersonal a nature
   that the name of the author has not the significance that it has in
   other poetry. Indeed, for a long time it was not customary to indicate
   the names of authors in the hymn-books. In some of the best hymnals
   to-day authors' names are given only in indexes at the back. The
   hymn-books generally have not considered individual authorship so
   important as to prevent some natural growth in an immature hymn, or to
   cut away dead and crooked branches. "Come Ye Disconsolate" is an
   example of an immature poem growing by "folk-culture" into one of the
   first-rate hymns of the language.

   In Byron's book of songs, "Hebrew Melodies," published in 1815, with
   music, there is no true hymn. "The Assyrian came down like a wolf on
   the fold" was included in a few books of the middle of the last
   century; but it is a spirited song of war rather than of devotion.
   Neither of his renderings of the Psalms is a good hymn. The better one
   begins:


   In the valley of waters we wept on that day

   When the host of the stranger made Salem his prey.

   And our heads on our bosoms droopingly lay,

   And our hearts were so full of the land far away.

   His most earnest and devout religious song contains a single word that
   led to "numerous attacks upon the noble author's religion" [22] and to
   a vigorous reply from the noble author. The troublesome monosyllable
   was "if" in


   If that high world which lies beyond

   Our own, surviving Love endears;

   If there the cherished heart be fond,

   The eye the same, except in tears--

   How welcome those untrodden spheres!

   How sweet this very hour to die!

   To soar from earth and find all fears,

   Lost in thy light--Eternity!


   It must be so; 'tis not for self

   That we so tremble on the brink;

   The striving to o'erleap the gulf,

   Yet cling to being's severing link.

   O that in future let us think

   To hold each heart the best that shares,

   With them the immortal waters drink,

   And soul in soul grow deathless theirs!

   However fine music Byron and his collaborators might have set these
   lines to, and however many hymn-books might have included them, one
   does not have to know much about hymns to see that the involved
   statement of this idea--"If what we say we believe to be true is really
   so, how sweet it would be to die right now!"--would not be sung as part
   of the service of the church.

   This evident stir of the hymn sentiment among the larger figures of the
   time was felt also among uncounted humbler ones. There was a true
   democracy in this realm of poetry. Any man under his own vine and
   fig-tree could have his own harp. Hundreds--thousands--of hymns found
   their way into print; many more thousands were perhaps mercifully not
   preserved. Most of the verses are of course not poetry but honest rimes
   carrying right ideas and good sentiment. Among them all there are a few
   superb hymns. William Williams, a devout itinerant Welsh preacher,
   wrote many hymns; one of them, "[69]Guide Me, O Thou Great Jehovah,"
   still lives as his great contribution to the hymn-book. Benjamin
   Beddome (1717-95), a leader of the Baptists of England, wrote many
   hymns, 830 of which were collected and published by his friends. "Did
   Christ o'er Sinners Weep?" is perhaps the best known of them. His song
   on reading the Bible may not have the sweep of lyric wings, but it
   carries, in noble and not inharmonious words, a most important truth.
   If one reads these lines gravely he may be surprised to see how rich in
   truth they grow as he regards them more closely, considering the
   meaning of the Bible in the history of civilization as well as of
   individual lives:


   God, in the gospel of his Son,

   Makes his eternal counsels known:

   Where love in all its glory shines,

   And truth is drawn in fairest lines.


   Here sinners of the humbler frame

   May taste his grace and learn his name;

   May read in characters of blood

   The wisdom, power, and grace of God.


   The prisoner here may break his chain,

   The weary rest from all his pain,

   The captive feel his bondage cease,

   The mourner find the way of peace.


   Here faith reveals to mortal eyes

   A brighter world beyond the skies,

   Here shines the light which guides his way

   From earth to realms of perfect day.


   O grant us grace, Almighty Lord,

   To read and mark thy holy word,

   Its truth with meekness to receive,

   And by its holy precepts live.

   John Byrom, a fellow in Trinity College, Oxford, wrote a number of
   hymns, but one of which, "Christian, Awake, Salute the Happy Morn,"
   survives. In 1787 Dr. John Rippon published "A Selection of Hymns from
   the Best Authors," which contained a new hymn signed with the initial
   "K."--"[70]How Firm a Foundation." This exultant song of faith, one of
   the great hymns of the eighteenth century, closes with these words:


   The soul that on Jesus still leans for repose

   I will not, I will not desert to his foes;

   That soul, though all hell should endeavor to shake,

   I'll never, no never, no never forsake.

   These lively songs of the latter half of the eighteenth century show a
   genuine hunger after righteousness; they are joyful in the sense of the
   soul's freedom to reach toward heaven, and they are unshakably certain
   of the infinite power and goodness of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [15] "Hetty Wesley," London, 1907.

   [16] "A History of English Prosody," Vol. II, p. 531. London, 1908.

   [17] From a letter of Wesley. Quoted by D. Baines-Griffeth in "Wesley
   the Anglican." London, 1919.

   [18] Quoted by David Craemer, in "Methodist Hymnody," New York, 1848.

   [19] London, 1785.

   [20] New York, 1876.

   [21] C. S. Nutter, "Hymns and Hymn-Writers," New York, 1911.

   [22] "The Works of Lord Byron," Vol. III, p. 383, note. Murray, London,
   1900.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII
BISHOP HEBER AND THE ROMANTIC REVIVAL

   A new period of English hymnody centers around Reginald Heber, who with
   Watts and Wesley stands in the succession of master writers of hymns.
   Heber was guided by three ideas in regard to the hymn, none of which
   was new, yet the union of which was new and highly important. The first
   idea was that of Bishop Ken and others, and of course the medieval
   church, that the hymn is liturgical and should follow and adapt itself
   to the church calendar throughout the year; the second idea was that of
   Watts, the Wesleys, and the Baptist leaders that the hymn should follow
   and supplement the sermon; the third idea, so urged by Addison, was
   that the hymn should be a finished piece of literary art. Heber strove
   to create and have adopted by the Church of England not a psalm-book,
   nor a psalm-and-hymn-book, but a hymnal to accompany the Book of Common
   Prayer as a part of the church service; he strove to create and collect
   a body of hymns which should be of most practical use to instruct and
   inspire the people and which at the same time should be poems of high
   literary excellence.

   Reginald Heber was born at Malpas, Cheshire, in 1783. His father was a
   minister of the Church of England, a learned, well-to-do, devout man, a
   clergyman of the type which all along has carried with zealous good
   works a certain rich comeliness of life. After a brilliant career at
   Oxford, Reginald Heber spent fourteen more or less idyllic years at
   Hodnet as a country squire, a country parson, and a man of letters.
   During this period, with the advice and contributions of Scott, Milman,
   and others, he virtually finished his hymn-book. As Bishop of Calcutta
   he left for India in 1823. He died in India after three years of
   missionary work in which he combined superbly the good qualities of the
   modern administrative expert with those of old-time saint. His book,
   "Hymns Written and Adapted for the Weekly Church Service of the Year,"
   was never officially adopted, though more than any other book it
   brought hymn singing into the Established Church. Further than that, it
   set a new standard for the whole of English hymnody.

   And a standard was needed. The opening of the century brought a
   wide-spread and, as has been said, democratic publication and use of
   hymns. Books were published not only in London but in Southampton,
   Manchester, and other towns over England as well as in America. There
   was a copious output of original hymns by various authors, in addition
   to collections of old and new hymns made for various chapels, parishes,
   or individuals. Between 1800 and 1820 there were nearly fifty different
   hymn-books in use in the Church of England alone; and yet the Church of
   England was still largely of the mind that hymn singing was a
   Dissenting innovation; the metrical Psalms were still in use and
   regarded as standard.

   Indeed, during these years the growth of hymnody had been so rapid and
   strong as to become disquieting to many; earnest efforts were made to
   limit it by church ordinances. The liberals, however, and the group of
   religious revivalists that was gathering at Oxford, instead of trying
   to restrict and curb the hymn, began to improve it and to use it
   powerfully for their purpose. Reactionary opposition but served to
   raise more singing; and, further, the wholesome competition for
   excellence among the singing people contributed to a great advance in
   English hymnody. In 1827 appeared the great books of Heber and
   [71]Keble. That of [72]Montgomery had appeared two years before.
   Besides the vigorous native hymnody, there was coming in also a new
   wealth of translations.

   In the midst of all this development of hymnody, it was Heber's book
   that, more than any other, set the standard. Heber maintains a higher
   literary level than is maintained by any other author of a large number
   of hymns. He brought some of the strong intellectual and artistic
   influences of the time into the hymn-book.

   Six of Heber's most famous hymns may be mentioned, each representing a
   different conception of hymnody and a different manifestation of the
   religious spirit. Each is a masterpiece of its type. They show the
   breadth of their author's understanding and sympathy; they indicate the
   intensity and depth of his religion. "Brightest and Best of the Sons of
   the Morning" is a calendar hymn for the feast of the Epiphany,
   liturgical, glittering, stately; "[73]The Son of God Goes Forth to War"
   is a call of churchly zeal, personal, evangelical, militant; "[74]By
   Cool Siloam's Shady Rill" is an exquisite nature poem as well as an
   exquisite hymn; "[75]Bread of the World in Mercy Broken" is a quiet
   communion hymn full of pensive loveliness and warm reality of faith;
   "From Greenland's Icy Mountains" is a hymn for foreign missions,
   immediately practical, yet blithely, almost gaily, romantic; "Holy,
   Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty" is a hymn of grandeur, sonorous, full of
   the pomp and circumstance of awful worship.

   The style of the Epiphany hymn suggests the "wealth of orient pearl and
   gold" as well as the cool and lively freshness of morning:


   Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,

   Dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid;

   Star of the east, the horizon adorning,

   Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.


   Cold on his cradle the dewdrops are shining;

   Low lies his head with the beast of the stall;

   Angels adore him, in slumber reclining,

   Maker, and Monarch, and Saviour of all.


   Say, shall we yield Him, in costly devotion,

   Odors of Edom and offerings divine?

   Gems of the mountain, and pearls of the ocean,

   Myrrh from the forest, and gold from the mine?


   Vainly we offer each ample oblation;

   Vainly with gifts would his favor secure;

   Richer by far is the heart's adoration;

   Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor.


   Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,

   Dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid;

   Star of the east, the horizon adorning,

   Guide where our infant Redeemer is laid.

   Notice the simplicity and beauty of this poem, its clarity, its
   strength, and its finish. The style is classical, Grecian. The lyric
   supports its burden of mood and idea with the lightness, the grace, and
   the surety of the Corinthian column. But above and beyond mere
   loveliness and strength of form is the beauty and power of its faith:
   "Richer by far is the heart's adoration."

   Notice the difference of movement, of feeling, and of idea in the
   following lines; the mood is not so much of worship as of energetic and
   enthusiastic service:


   From Greenland's icy mountains,

   From India's coral strand;

   Where Afric's sunny fountains

   Roll down their golden sand;

   From many an ancient river,

   From many a palmy plain,

   They call us to deliver

   Their land from error's chain.


   What though the spicy breezes

   Blow soft o'er Ceylon's isle,

   Though every prospect pleases,

   And only man is vile?

   In vain with lavish kindness

   The gifts of God are strewn;

   The heathen in his blindness

   Bows down to wood and stone.


   Shall we whose souls are lighted

   With wisdom from on high,

   Shall we to men benighted

   The lamp of life deny?

   Salvation, O Salvation!

   The joyful sound proclaim

   Till earth's remotest nation

   Has learned Messiah's name.


   Waft, waft, ye winds, his story,

   And you, ye waters, roll,

   Till like a sea of glory,

   It spreads from pole to pole;

   Till o'er our ransomed nature

   The lamb for sinners slain,

   Redeemer, King, Creator,

   In bliss returns to reign.

   This hymn was composed by Heber almost impromptu for a particular
   church service; impromptu, that is, so far as actual composition was
   concerned. But expressions like this of course do not come out of small
   experience and thought; behind it rather is a devoted soul, rich
   experience, deep loyalty to the church and her mission to the
   world--loyalty that was to bring him to India later to lay down his
   life.

   With a like readiness the musical setting of this hymn was written; and
   with like quickness its fame began to spread. A woman in Savannah,
   Georgia, impressed by reading Heber's hymns, requested a young bank
   clerk who had gone to Georgia from New England to write a tune for it.
   This was Lowell Mason, who was to have so large an influence in the
   music of the hymn-book and therefore in the musical life of
   Christendom. Lowell Mason's air and this hymn seem now to be one and
   inseparable.

   "From Greenland's Icy Mountains" is essentially modern, "evangelical."
   Its energy, its experimental eagerness, its ardor for going into new
   lands, its warm feeling of human kinship, its democratic zeal for
   world-wide enlightenment and betterment, its air of freedom, its lively
   faith--all belong to the awakening spirit of the time.

   Compare with the foregoing lyrics this rolling hymn of the temple, its
   grave, rich phrases, its somber tone, its spirit of solemn adoration:


   Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty!

   Early in the morning our song shall rise to thee;

   Holy, holy, holy, merciful and mighty,

   God in three persons, blessed Trinity.


   Holy, holy, holy, all the saints adore thee,

   Casting down their golden crowns around the glassy sea;

   Cherubim and seraphim falling down before thee,

   Which wert, and art, and evermore shalt be.


   Holy, holy, holy, though the darkness hide thee,

   Though the eye of sinful man thy glory may not see;

   Only thou art holy; there is none beside thee,

   Perfect in power, in love, and purity.


   Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty!

   All thy works shall praise thy name, in earth, and sky, and sea;

   Holy, holy, holy, merciful and mighty,

   God in Three Persons, blessed Trinity!

   The lines suggest august cathedral heights and spaces, the spirit of
   worship described in Milton's "At a Solemn Music," or expressed in the
   Psalm, "Lift up your heads, O ye gates." Its spirit is that of the
   Hebrew prophets approaching the Sovereign God, that of the medieval
   worshiper of dread Deity whom none might approach save through
   mediation as of Virgin and saints. Yet it is one of the hymns most
   often sung by the church to-day.

   Each of these poems is in its own way a fervent and glowing expression
   of true religion. Each comes from a spirit broad, tolerant, deep enough
   to express for high and low and broad and narrow Christians a common
   faith and aspiration. One hymn embodies august contemplation of eternal
   verity; another, glad enjoyment of immortal beauty become tangible and
   visible to man; another, the dynamic impulse of human duty. They are
   not the work of a versifier aiming to please various tastes; they are
   the expression, harmonized and confident, of a rich life abundant in
   its enjoyment of beauty, its perception of truth, its loss of self in
   joyful service. This early nineteenth-century bishop was moved by zeal
   like Livingstone's, and by ardor--less spectacular and less wild--like
   Byron's, to go out to a distant people needing help and to give up his
   life in their behalf. The lyrics of Heber suggest the English "complete
   gentleman" after the order of Sir Philip Sidney. Thackeray in "The Four
   Georges" describes Heber:

     The charming poet, the happy possessor of all sorts of gifts and
     accomplishments--birth, wit, fame, high character, competence--he
     was the beloved priest in his home at Hodnet, counselling the people
     in their troubles, advising them in their difficulties, kneeling
     often at their sick beds at the hazard of his own life; where there
     was strife the peacemaker, when there was want, the free giver.

   After Watts, Wesley, and Heber, the next major hymn-writer was a
   Scotsman of Irish descent, [76]James Montgomery (1771-1845), who edited
   the "Sheffield Iris," a paper of revolutionary political tendencies.
   Montgomery's life was not calm; on account of his publications he was
   lodged in jail for three terms of six months each. Happily the last
   years of his life were more placid; instead of prison sentences and
   fines he was given a royal pension of two hundred pounds a year.

   There is a new development of the English hymn in the verses of
   Montgomery. The reader is aware in these hymns of the natural
   surroundings. He sees English scenes and feels the breezes of the
   seasons blowing; Montgomery is somewhat more at home on the earth than
   are Watts and Wesley. He did not believe either that


   This world's a fleeting show

   For man's illusion given,

   or that


   This world's a wilderness of woe,

   This world is not my home,

   as Thomas Moore sang in his "Divine Hymns." Instead, Montgomery's hymns
   contain lines like these:


   The forests in their strength rejoice;

   Hark on the evening breeze,

   As once of old the Lord God's voice

   Is heard among the trees.


   His blessings fall in plenteous showers

   Upon the lap of earth

   That teems with foliage, fruit, and flowers,

   And rings with infant mirth.


   If God hath made this earth so fair,

   Where sin and death abound,

   How beautiful beyond compare

   Will Paradise be found.

   In the following lines one catches a glimpse of the English
   country-side on a Sunday morning:


   Not by the brazen trumpet's voice

   But the sweet skylark's early lay,

   Our tribes are summoned to rejoice

   In God their Saviour on this day.


   Not to the battle field we throng,

   With deadly steel in murderous hands,

   But on the hill of peace the song

   Of triumph bursts from all our bands.

   "Sunshine" and "air" and "freedom" recur again and again in his hymns.
   He writes much of happiness of paradise, but fully as much about a
   happy, truth-seeing, and justly dealing earth. His description of the
   mission of Christ in the world makes an attractive picture of the
   future of the human race:


   He comes to break oppression,

   To set the captive free;

   To take away transgression,

   And rule in equity.


   He comes with succor speedy,

   To those who suffer wrong;

   To help the poor and needy

   And bid the weak be strong.


   To give them songs for sighing,

   Their darkness turn to light,

   Whose souls, condemned and dying,

   Were precious in his sight.


   He shall come down like showers

   Upon the fruitful earth,

   And love, joy, hope, like flowers,

   Spring in his path to birth.


   Before him on the mountains

   Shall peace the herald go--

   And righteousness in fountains

   From hill to valley flow.

   This hymn was written at a time when new impulses of freedom were
   stirring the world, by a man whose faith in liberty and truth had
   lodged him time and again behind prison bars, and who no less devotedly
   than his contemporaries, Shelley, Jefferson, Adams, Burke, Franklin,
   Washington, and the American "embattled farmers," was battling to free
   human life from the tyranny of common ignorance and wrong-headedness as
   well as from that of stupid and selfish authority. The reflection comes
   inevitably that if the Christian theory and practice would affect world
   politics and individual relations as the hymn describes, human beings
   have been unfortunate in not giving it a better trial, especially since
   the opposite theory does not seem to work well. It is easy to say now
   as it was then that these are lines of a simple visionary. His idea,
   indeed, is cheerful--that there will be a general enlightenment in the
   world; that people shall know the truth, and the truth shall make them
   free; that there will be less of the law of the jungle among men; that
   men shall do justly and love mercy and walk humbly with God in truth
   and might and love. This is the enthusiastic teaching of Montgomery's
   hymn. If these verses are simple and commonplace, so is truth simple;
   and so is the innate hunger of the human heart a commonplace.

   Montgomery published in 1853 "Original Hymns," 355 in number; of these
   the hymn-book has selected about fifteen, thus ranking him as to number
   of good hymns next to Wesley and Watts. Some of the individual books
   with the number chosen from Montgomery's hymns are as follows:

   "The Baptist Hymn Book"                 25
   "The Common Service Book"               14
   "The English Hymnal"                    10
   "The Hymn and Tune Book" (Unitarian)    10
   "Hymns Ancient and Modern"              13
   "Hymns of Worship and Service"          14
   "The Methodist Hymnal"                  19
   "The New Hymnal" (Protestant Episcopal) 17
   "The Oxford [University] Hymn Book"     6
   "The Union Hymnal" (Hebrew)             3
   "Hymns of the Living Church"            10

   Among his best hymns are "[77]According to Thy Gracious Word";
   "[78]Angels from the Realms of Glory"; "[79]Forever with the Lord";
   "[80]In the Hour of Trial"; "[81]O, Where Shall Rest be Found?"
   "[82]Prayer Is the Soul's Sincere Desire." These are great songs of
   faith.

   In the year of the publication of Heber's hymn-book appeared another
   book that was to prove immensely popular and influential. This was John
   Keble's "[83]Christian Year." The book was a lyrical prelude to the
   Oxford Movement. It quickly attained an enormous popularity; Oxford
   undergraduates rushed to buy it as did country squires, London society
   folk, and the reading public throughout the English-speaking world.
   Keble was called from his obscure country parish to the professorship
   of poetry at Oxford. At the time of his death in 1866 "The Christian
   Year" had passed through ninety-six editions; his century esteemed him
   the greatest of all English religious poets. And although he does not
   rank in the hymn-book to-day as high as Heber or Montgomery, he is
   still important and is likely to maintain the hold he now has. His
   "[84]Voice That Breathed o'er Eden" is probably the most frequently
   sung of English marriage hymns, and, next to Mrs. Gurney's "[85]O
   Perfect Love, All Human Love Transcending," the best. Keble's wedding
   hymn possesses what is a great advantage for a hymn, a poetically
   attractive first line; Mrs. Gurney's hymn having an arresting first
   line, grows up with it, whereas Keble's hymn somewhat falls away.

   Keble is represented in the hymn-books of to-day by an average of about
   four lyrics. His "Sun of My Soul" is one of the most familiar and most
   beautiful of the evening hymns. It is another composition in which the
   hymners have taken a hand at making perfect; but in this case the
   improvement has been solely that of elimination. With practical
   unanimity they have chosen six of Keble's fourteen original stanzas,
   the third, seventh, eighth, and last three; the result is a brief,
   systematic, logically progressive, and complete lyric. The original,
   entitled "[86]Evening," is the second poem in "The Christian Year":


   'Tis gone, that bright and orbed blaze,

   Fast fading from our wistful gaze;

   Yon mantling cloud has hid from sight

   The last faint pulse of quivering light.


   In darkness and in weariness

   The traveller on his way must press;

   No gleam to watch, on tree or tower,

   Whiling away the lonesome hour.


   Sun of my soul, Thou Saviour dear,

   It is not night if Thou be near;

   O! may no earth-born cloud arise

   To hide Thee from Thy servant's eyes.


   When round Thy wondrous works below

   My searching rapturous glance I throw

   Tracing Thy wisdom, power, and love,

   In earth or sky, in stream or grove;--


   Or by the light Thy words disclose,

   Watch time's full river as it flows,

   Scanning Thy Gracious Providence

   Where not too deep for mortal sense:--


   When with dear friends sweet talk I hold,

   And all the flowers of life unfold;

   Let not Thy heart within me burn,

   Except in all I Thee discern.


   When the soft dews of kindly sleep

   My wearied eyelids gently steep,

   Be my last thought, how sweet to rest

   Forever on my Saviour's breast!


   Abide with me from morn till eve,

   For without Thee I cannot live!

   Abide with me when night is nigh,

   For without Thee I dare not die!


   Thou framer of the light and dark,

   Steer through the tempest Thine own ark!

   Amid the howling wintry sea

   We are in port if we have Thee.


   The rulers of this Christian land,

   'Twixt Thee and us ordained to stand,--

   Guide Thou their course, O Lord, aright!

   Let all do all as in thy sight.


   Oh by Thine own sad burthen, borne

   So meekly up the hill of scorn,

   Teach Thou Thy priests their daily cross,

   To bear as Thine, nor count it loss!


   If some poor wandering child of Thine

   Have spurned to-day the choice divine;

   Now Lord, the gracious work begin;

   Let him no more lie down in sin!


   Watch by the sick, enrich the poor

   With blessings from Thy boundless store!

   Be every mourner's sleep to-night

   Like infant's slumbers, pure and light.


   Come now and bless us while we wake,

   Ere through the world our course we take;

   Till in the ocean of Thy love,

   We lose ourselves in Heaven above!

   This hymn is such as Wordsworth might have written had he been a
   country parson; he could not have written a better one. Indeed, Keble's
   hymn has probably gone into wider fame and exerted larger power than
   any single poem of Wordsworth's. "Sun of My Soul," for its clear and
   sweetly flowing lines, for its glow of poetic feeling, for its tense
   and harmonious expression of the Christian graces of faith, hope, and
   charity, is likely to live as long as English hymns are sung.

   Another great hymnist of his time is Henry F. Lyte (1793-1847), a
   graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, and a country rector in
   Devonshire. In 1834 he published his "Spirit of the Psalms,"
   paraphrases written somewhat in the spirit of the romantic poets; the
   book received slight attention compared with that given the books of
   Montgomery, Heber, and Keble. Yet his fame grew to be as secure as
   theirs by virtue of a single song, "Abide with Me." This is one of the
   most tender, most fervent, and most poetic of hymns.


   Abide with me! Fast falls the eventide,

   The darkness deepens--Lord, with me abide!

   When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,

   Help of the helpless, O, abide with me!


   Swift to its close ebbs out life's little day;

   Earth's joys grow dim, its glories pass away;

   Change and decay in all around I see;

   O thou who changest not, abide with me.


   I need thy presence every passing hour;

   What but thy grace can foil the tempter's power?

   Who like thyself my guide and stay can be?

   Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide with me.


   I fear no foe, with thee at hand to bless;

   Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness;

   Where is death's sting? Where, grave, thy victory?

   I triumph still, if thou abide with me.


   Hold thou thy cross before my closing eyes;

   Shine through the gloom and point me to the skies;

   Heaven's morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee;

   In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me!

   The simplicity and calm of this lyric reminds one again of Wordsworth.
   It is a great consolation song of Christianity. People in all sorts of
   trouble have found relief through this song--its soft music, its bloom
   of poetic beauty, its deep faith in the goodness of God. It is a grand,
   strong hymn for souls in trouble; it has added serenity and grace to
   the end of many a day; and it has been a sort of sublime lullaby for
   many a weary body going into the sleep of death.

   Legends have gathered around the great hymns as they have gathered
   about the lives of certain saints and sages. There seems to be no doubt
   as to the truth of the romantic account of the writing of Lyte's famous
   hymn. In his later years he had written a poem, "Declining Days,"
   containing these lines:


   O thou whose touch can lend

   Life to the dead, thy quickening grace supply;

   And grant me swan-like, my last breath to spend

   In song that may not die.

   And it came about that one day after the celebration of holy communion
   he bade his flock good-by; in the evening from his bed he handed to
   some one near a paper; a few moments later he was dead. On the paper
   was found written this song that may not die.

   Young John Henry Newman wrote "Lead, Kindly Light" in the midst of
   great stress and struggle. He was on a ship becalmed for a week in the
   Straits of Bonifacio, yet in the midst of the fiercest storm. He tells
   in the "Apologia pro Vita Sua," Chapter III, of the writing of the
   hymn. Physically ill, so homesick that he sat on the bedside and wept,
   he was going through intellectual and spiritual struggle typical of the
   struggles going on in Europe.

     I had fierce thoughts against the liberals. Great events were
     happening at home and abroad which brought out into form and
     passionate expression the various beliefs which had so gradually
     been winning their way into my mind. Shortly before, there had been
     a revolution in France. . . . Again, the great Reform Agitation was
     going on around me as I wrote.

   The poem was published in "The British Magazine" in 1834.


   Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,

   Lead thou me on!

   The night is dark and I am far from home;

   Lead thou me on!

   Keep thou my feet; I do not ask to see

   The distant scene; one step enough for me.


   I was not ever thus, nor prayed that thou

   Should'st lead me on;

   I loved to choose and see my path; but now

   Lead thou me on!

   I loved the garish day, and spite of fears,

   Pride ruled my will; remember not past years!


   So long thy power hath blest me, sure it still

   Will lead me on

   O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till

   The night is gone,

   And with the morn those angel faces smile

   Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile!

   This is one of the hymns that never needed any kind of revision to fit
   it for the hymn-book. Three changes have been made, but only in the
   title: Newman headed the poem first, "Faith--Heavenly Leadings"; next,
   in "Lyra Apostolica," "Unto the Godly There Ariseth up a Light in the
   Darkness"; then, in "Occasional Verses," 1868, he called it "The Pillar
   of Cloud." This is another of the rare songs that are perfect poetry
   and perfect hymnody. The few "amendments" that have been attempted
   serve but to show the futility of trying to better it. One of these
   attempts reads:


   So long thy power hath blest me, surely still

   'Twill lead me on,

   Through dreary hours, through pain and sorrow, till

   The night is gone.

   This seems to be an effort to compel the hymn to do what Dr. Johnson
   said hymnody must do, "reject the image and colorings of poetic
   discourse." "Send kindly Light" is another curiously dull effort at
   emendation.

   Cardinal Newman--he was of course a member of the Church of England
   when he wrote "Lead, Kindly Light"--did not write another remarkable
   hymn, though a good portion of the hymn-book "Lyra Apostolica" is made
   up of his hymns. Some of these are moderately good verses; most of them
   but emphasize the rarity and difficulty of the type. The hymn CIII in
   "Lyra Apostolica" may be taken as an example. It begins with the same
   image as his great hymn. But observe how controversy has driven out the
   spirit and breath of poetry:


   Poor wanderers! yea, ye sore distrest

   To find the path which Christ hath blest,

   Tracked by his saintly throng;

   Each claims to trust his own weak will,

   Blind idol--so ye languish still,

   All wranglers and all wrong.


   He saw of old, and met the need

   Granting you prophets of your creed;

   And throes of fear to 'suage,

   They fenced the rich bequests He made

   And sacred bands have safe conveyed

   Their charge from age to age.


   Wanderers come home, when erring most

   Christ's Church aye kept the faith, nor lost

   One grain of holy truth;

   She ne'er has erred as those ye trust

   And now shall lift her from the dust

   And REIGN as in her youth!

   "Lead, Kindly Light," serene, inspired poetry, needs no words spelled
   in capitals nor exclamation points at the end. And there is nothing of
   wrangling in the religion of this hymn. Its mood of fervent, humble
   prayer and the lyric charm of its words and rhythms have carried this
   hymn to the heart of Christendom. The difficulty of the half-line, "I
   loved the garish day," wherein is an unhappy figure suggesting
   preference of a torch at night to broad open day to travel by--this
   slight infelicity is submerged like a stone in the brook by the full
   swift current of the poetry. The line describing the trials and
   hardships of life by "moor and fen and crag and torrent" is richly
   suggestive of the wild beauty of old romance; and what a poetic imaging
   of this troubled life! The last two lines are a triumph of lyric art
   and at the same time of Christian hope.

   Henry Hart Milman, who had preceded Keble as professor of poetry at
   Oxford, and who later became one in the succession of famous deans of
   St. Paul's, wrote twelve hymns for Bishop Heber's book; two of these,
   "[87]Ride On, Ride On in Majesty," and "[88]When Our Heads Are Bowed
   with Woe," are still well known.

   Sir John Bowring, member of Parliament, editor of the "Westminister
   Review," sometime governor of Hong Kong, famous scholar, published two
   volumes of hymns, one in 1823, another in 1825. Two of his hymns seem
   to be among the imperishable poems of the language: "[89]Watchman, Tell
   Us of the Night," and "[90]In the Cross of Christ I Glory." Bowring was
   a great progressive; he delighted in the new intellectual awakening,
   and had strong faith in the beneficence of scientific knowledge. In the
   hymn "Upon the Gospel's Sacred Page" he says:


   On mightier wing, in loftier flight,

   From year to year does knowledge soar.

   Yet he had no fear for religious truth.


   And as it soars, the Gospel light

   Becomes effulgent, more and more.

   To Bowring the rising doubts of his time were but a dark background for
   the bright sureties of the Christian religion. None of the old carols
   have surpassed the following dramatic hymn in its atmosphere of
   Christmas-night enchantment, and in lyric statement of Christian hope:


   Watchman, tell us of the night,

   What its signs of promise are.

   Traveller, o'er yon mountain height

   See that glory-beaming star!


   Watchman, does its beauteous ray

   Aught of joy or hope foretell?

   Traveller, yes: it brings the day,

   Promised day of Israel.


   Watchman, tell us of the night;

   Higher, yet that star ascends.

   Traveller, blessedness and light,

   Peace and truth its course portends!


   Watchman, will its beams alone

   Gild the spot that gave them birth?

   Traveller, ages are its own,

   See it bursts o'er all the earth!


   Watchman, tell us of the night,

   For the morning seems to dawn.

   Traveller, darkness takes its flight;

   Doubt and terror are withdrawn.


   Watchman, let thy wandering cease;

   Hie thee to thy quiet home!

   Traveller, lo, the Prince of Peace,

   Lo, the Son of God is come!

   James Edmeston (1791-1867) published, among other volumes, "Sacred
   Lyrics," 1821. Two of his more than two thousand published hymns
   remain, "[91]Lead Us, Heavenly Father, Lead Us," and the more famous
   evening hymn:


   Saviour, breathe an evening blessing

   Ere repose our spirits seal;

   Sin and want we come confessing;

   Thou canst save and thou canst heal.



   Though destruction walk around us,

   Though the arrow near us fly,

   Angel guards from thee surround us.

   We are safe if thou art nigh.

   These are musical, sweet lines of confidence and repose of spirit. The
   last stanza is a notable example of Christian calm in the face of
   danger, and exultation in the face of death.

   Oxford has had much to do with making the hymn-book. Hugh Stowell, who
   went out to become one of the most popular preachers of his time and
   who was one of the most vigorous opponents of the Tractarians,
   published the year after he left Oxford his one great hymn, "[92]From
   Every Stormy Wind That Blows." With the full glow of the fervor of true
   religion, this hymn combines a literary finish that reaches finality.
   At the first words, it rises into lyric flight as with free sweep of
   strong wings.


   From every stormy wind that blows,

   From every swelling tide of woes;

   There is a calm, a sure retreat:

   'Tis found beneath the mercy seat.


   There is a place where Jesus sheds

   The oil of gladness on our heads;

   A place than all besides more sweet:

   It is the blood-bought mercy seat.


   There is a scene where spirits blend,

   Where friend holds fellowship with friend:

   Though sundered far, by faith they meet

   Around one common mercy seat.


   Ah! whither could we flee for aid,

   When tempted, desolate, dismayed;

   Or how the hosts of hell defeat,

   Had suffering saints no mercy seat?


   There, there, on eagle wings we soar,

   Where time and sense seem all no more;

   And Heaven comes down our souls to greet,

   While glory crowns the mercy seat.

   The term "mercy seat" gives probably no definite picture to most
   persons who read the poem; one feels that it means the Source of
   Goodness: it is not necessary to the effect of the hymn to visualize
   the tabernacle ritual of the mercy seat. Many hymn-books have
   unfortunately changed the line,


   Where time and sense seem all no more,

   to read,


   And sin and sense molest no more.

   Perhaps the revisers did not like the use of "all," a word that
   Tennyson delights to use in similar slightly oblique ways. Perhaps they
   desired to add a touch of homily by the word "sin." At any rate, the
   revision will not stand. The thrilling abandon of devotion in the last
   stanza, the grand triumph of spirit over flesh, is too strong for some
   of the milder books. It is the climax of Stowell's poem and should be
   kept:


   O may my hand forget her skill,

   My tongue be silent, stiff, and still,

   My bounding heart forget to beat,

   If I forget the mercy seat.

   The matter of literary sources in the study of hymns is usually not
   difficult if one is familiar with the Psalms. "If I forget thee, O
   Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember
   thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth," is part of the
   137th Psalm. The idea of the hymn is based on Exodus 25:21-22: "And
   thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou
   shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee. And then I will meet
   with thee and I will commune with thee above the mercy seat."

   The hymn may be called good literary art; and it is likely that some
   millions of persons have found it a very adequate expression of
   religious faith and hope.

   One imagines that English poetry, and the hymn-book in particular, must
   have suffered great loss by the early, sad death of Henry Kirke White,
   who wrote such hymnal lines as:


   Howl, winds of night, your force combine;

   Without his high behest

   Ye shall not, in the mountain pine,

   Disturb the sparrow's nest.

   and:


   He yokes the whirlwind to his car

   And sweeps the howling skies,

   and the hymn "When Marshaled on the Nightly Plain," closing with the
   lines,


   For ever and forevermore,

   The Star, the Star of Bethlehem!

   and the more familiar hymn beginning,


   [93]Oft in danger, oft in woe.

   Sir Robert Grant (1785-1838), prominent in English letters and
   politics, member of Parliament, privy councilor, governor of Bombay,
   wrote many hymns, two of which survive. Two stanzas from "[94]O Worship
   the King" show its high poetic imagination:


   Oh, tell of his might, oh, sing of his grace!

   Whose robe is the light, whose canopy, space.

   His chariots of wrath the deep thunder-clouds form,

   And dark is his path on the wings of the storm.


   Thy bountiful care, what tongue can recite?

   It breathes in the air, it shines in the light,

   It streams from the hills, it descends to the plain,

   And sweetly distils in the dew and the rain.

   His litany hymn, "[95]Saviour, When in Dust to Thee," is a poignantly
   beautiful expression of penitence and adoration.

   One remembers that in the year 1830 an old order was giving place to a
   new one. Byron and Keats were dead; Scott died in 1832, Coleridge in
   1834; Shelley had been dead eight years--though his ideas were being
   scattered, as by his plea and prophecy in the "Ode to the West Wind":


   Scatter as from an unextinguished hearth,

   Ashes and sparks, my words, among mankind.

   And a new spring was not far behind. Alfred Tennyson published the
   "Lady of Shalott" volume of poems in 1832; Browning published "Pauline"
   in 1833; Carlyle wrote "Sartor Resartus" in 1831. The Reform Bill was
   passed; the new scheme of public education was forming; factories and
   railroads were building. George Eliot, Matthew Arnold, and Walt Whitman
   were in school. That women were going to school is a notable fact that
   soon manifests itself in the hymn-book. In 1830 Tennyson, Darwin,
   Gladstone, Poe, Chopin, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and Lincoln were all
   just twenty-one. Emerson and Carlyle were discovering each other and
   the new world of German thought. In 1833 slavery was abolished in the
   British possessions. Emigrants were crowding westward. English social
   and industrial life was breaking from its old shell, with new wings--to
   be singed and smoked--but still, wings. The Transcendental and
   Unitarian and abolition movements were on in New England. The
   Romanticists were hearing


   The still sad music of humanity,

   and the Realists were beginning to see and stress humanity's obviously
   cold and ugly aspects with a view to betterment. Hopeful idealism, too,
   was alive and active. New political ideas and new social and religious
   questionings and affirmations were stirring like wind in the trees. In
   the field of English hymnody there was a new springtime. New hymns, new
   collections, and new books of original hymns grew and multiplied.

   A few of the hymns of the time, selected by the suffrage of the hymnals
   of the present, reveal the morning-time vigor and arousal. They show a
   spirit of travail, of militancy and hope which has always characterized
   times when hymn writing has most flourished. Following are first lines
   of a few hymns representative of the great number which appeared:


   [96]Brightest and best of the sons of the morning;

   [97]Look, ye saints, the sight is glorious;

   [98]From Greenland's icy mountains;

   [99]Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty;

   [100]The Son of God goes forth to war;

   [101]In the cross of Christ I glory;

   [102]Watchman, tell us of the night;

   [103]Breast the wave, Christian;

   [104]Ride on, ride on in majesty;

   [105]Christian, seek not yet repose;

   [106]The morning light is breaking.

   "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." These hymns and
   the others like them show that with the industrial, political,
   scientific, and philosophical arousal of the time there was new life
   and vigor in the religion of the people. In the following stanza from
   Henry Buckall's translation from the German of F. von Conitz (1700),
   three things may be noted as to the trend of English hymnody: (1)
   Oxford University is again a mainspring of hymnody; (2) foreign
   influence is felt anew; (3) the hymn takes new freedom of form, being
   no longer confined to the long, common, and short meters:


   [107]Come, my soul, thou must be waking,

   Now is breaking

   O'er the earth another day;

   Come to him who made this splendor,

   See thou render

   All thy feeble strength can pay.

   In America, too, the south winds were blowing, and the sound of new
   hymns was heard in the land. The first really standard hymn produced in
   America had been published in 1800 by Timothy Dwight, president of Yale
   College, in his edition and revision of Watts's Psalms:


   [108]I love thy kingdom, Lord,

   The house of thine abode.

   It is a simple, strong melodious song of love for the church. The
   fourth stanza may be quoted as an example of what hymnal poetry ought
   to be. Its high sincerity of devotion is like that of the saints and
   martyrs. Its four simple lines move in stately eloquence of
   description.


   Beyond my highest joy

   I prize her heavenly ways,

   Her sweet communion, solemn vows,

   Her hymns of love and praise.

   Another American hymn that may be placed in the first rank was written
   in 1830 by a young school-teacher, Ray Palmer, who had that year been
   graduated from Yale. It grew out of a hard struggle of discouragement,
   illness, and religious uncertainty. Years later Palmer told of the
   writing of it. "There was not the slightest thought," he said, "of
   writing for another eye, least of all writing a hymn for Christian
   worship. I gave from what I felt by writing the stanzas, with little
   effort. I recalled that I wrote them with very tender emotion, and
   penned the last stanza with tears." The hymn begins:


   [109]My faith looks up to thee,

   Thou lamb of Calvary,

   Saviour Divine:

   Now hear me while I pray,

   Take all my guilt away,

   O let me from this day

   Be wholly thine.

   In few strong words, like swift marching, it speaks of life and death
   and immortality, and the reach of the human soul toward God. Notice the
   lyric power of the last stanza, its statement of the transience of
   life, its somber picture of death, and its glow of triumphant faith:


   When ends life's transient dream,

   When death's cold, sullen stream

   Shall o'er me roll,

   Blest Saviour, then in love,

   Fear and distrust remove,

   O bear me safe above,

   A ransomed soul.

   In 1820 appeared William Cullen Bryant's "Thou Whose Unmeasured Temple
   Stands," written for the dedication of a church. If the friendly warmth
   and charity of these peaceful lines, and the sturdiness of their faith,
   does animate the folk singing as they dedicate their church, that
   church will likely be a fountain of welfare among men and of glory to
   God. Notice the hymn-book's idea of the purpose of a church in a
   community:


   May they who err be guided here

   To find the better way;

   And they who mourn, and they who fear,

   Be strengthened as they pray.


   May faith grow firm and love grow warm,

   And hallowed wishes rise;

   While round these peaceful walls the storm

   Of earth-born passion dies.

   Francis Scott Key wrote "[110]The Star-Spangled Banner" in 1814 and the
   hymn, "[111]Lord, with a Glowing Heart I'd Praise Thee," in 1826. The
   hymn has not the spontaneity and lyric fire of the splendid if
   flamboyant war-song. "The Star-Spangled Banner" is too martial a song
   to be the ultimate "national anthem" of a peace-loving people; yet
   certain editors, finding it to need an extra touch of pugnacity, have
   changed an important word in the last stanza,


   Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,

   Key wrote it:


   Then conquer we must, for our cause it is just.

   George Washington Doane, Bishop of New Jersey, published in 1834 his
   famous evening hymn, a graceful lyric full of gentleness and piety:


   [112]Softly now the light of day

   Fades upon my sight away;

   Free from care, from labor free,

   Lord, I would commune with thee.

   He wrote also the militant evangelical hymn "[113]Fling Out the
   Banner." Some books have felt it necessary to modify the force of this
   hymn by changing the words "Fling out the banner" to "Uplift the
   banner." They had better leave it as it is.


   Fling out the banner! let it float

   Skyward and seaward, high and wide:

   The sun shall light its shining folds,

   The cross on which the Saviour died.


   Uplift the banner! Angels bend

   In anxious silence o'er the sign,

   And vainly seek to comprehend

   The wonder of the love divine.


   Fling out the banner! Heathen lands

   Shall see from far the glorious sight,

   And nations gathering at the call,

   Their spirits kindle in its light.

   The President of the United States from 1825 to 1829, John Quincy
   Adams, as has been mentioned, was the author of a book of psalms and
   hymns. One of Adams's poems, first published in Boston in January,
   1807, carries the same central idea as Henry Vaughan's "Retreat," and
   as Wordsworth's "Intimations of Immorality," published the same year.
   Stanzas of the poem follow:


   That inextinguishable beam

   With dust united at our birth,

   Sheds a more dim, discolored gleam,

   The more it lingers upon earth.


   Closed in his dark abode of clay,

   The stream of glory faintly burns,

   Not unobscured the lurid ray

   To its own native fount returns.


   But when the Lord of mortal breath

   Decrees his bounty to resume,

   And points the silent shaft of death,

   Which speeds the infant to the tomb,--


   No passion fierce, no low desire,

   Has quenched the radiance of the flame;

   Back to its God the living fire

   Returns unsullied as it came.

   Two of the best of the Christmas hymns were written by Edmund H. Sears,
   a Unitarian clergyman of Massachusetts. "[114]Calm on the Listening Ear
   of Night" appeared in 1834; "[115]It Came upon a Midnight Clear" was
   written fifteen years later.


   Calm on the listening ear of night

   Come Heaven's melodious strains,

   Where wild Judea stretches far

   Her silver-mantled plains.


   Celestial choirs from courts above

   Shed sacred glories there;

   And angels with their sparkling lyres

   Make music in the air.


   The answering hills of Palestine

   Send back the great reply,

   And greet, from all their holy heights,

   The Day-spring from on high;


   O'er the blue depths of Galilee

   There comes a holier calm;

   And Sharon waves, in solemn praise

   Her silent groves of palm.

   These two stanzas may be taken as representative of the new type of
   hymn which was gaining higher and higher advancement in the citizenship
   of English poetry. They approach the ideal which Heber held for the
   hymn as finished poetry.

   The stanzas, too, may be taken as illustrative of the new spirit of New
   England puritanism then rising into song, a kind of song that is true
   artistry of verse and at the same time most zealous and most catholic
   Christian worship. The stanzas are indicative, also, of intellectual
   and spiritual alertness and vigor; the reader can hardly fail to be
   impressed with their strong confidence and aggressiveness; they show
   something of the fighting zeal of Byron and Shelley, surging, however,
   with feeling not of revolt but triumphant advance. Hymns written around
   1835 abound in such expressions as "Fight the fight," "Cast thy dream
   of ease away," "The hosts of hell defeat," "There, there, on eagles'
   wings we soar," "Run the race," and "Lift thine eyes." One notices
   frequent spirited adjectives as "gleaming," "brightening," "towering,"
   and "soaring."

   The hymn about to be quoted is another American one which reflects the
   spirit abroad in the world, the flush of confidence and enthusiasm for
   the future aroused by the new mastering of the materials and forces of
   nature, and by new advances in politics, and philosophy, and religion.
   These singers have been thrilled by the railroad, the steamship, and
   other momentous inventions; they have been moved by Wordsworth's
   impulsive sympathy for the poor, by the younger poet's fierce rebellion
   against intellectual and spiritual tyranny, and by such ideas as young
   Tennyson's, who


   . . . dipt into the future as far as human eye could see,

   Saw the vision of the world and all the wonders that would be.

   The idea of world-wide kinship and responsibility was stirring in
   America, as well as in England. The hymn of the young New England
   Baptist preacher, Samuel F. Smith, is a significant Evangelical
   expression of new hope for the world:


   The morning light is breaking,

   The darkness disappears;

   The sons of earth are waking

   To penitential tears;

   Each breeze that swells the ocean

   Brings tidings from afar,

   Of nations in commotion,

   Prepared for Zion's war.


   See heathen nations bending

   Before the God we love,

   And thousand hearts ascending

   In gratitude above;

   While sinners now confessing,

   The gospel call obey

   And seek the Saviour's blessing,

   A nation in a day.


   Blest river of salvation,

   Pursue thy onward way;

   Flow thou to every nation,

   Nor in thy richness stay;

   Stay not till all the lowly

   Triumphant reach their home;

   Stay not till all the holy

   Proclaim the Lord is come.

   In 1832 Smith published his famous hymn of liberty, "[116]My Country,
   'Tis of Thee." The world's emergence into new emancipation of body and
   soul needed such verse as this song of freedom. It is a wholesome one
   for a free people to know by heart and to sing with spirit and
   understanding. Notice how recurrent in every stanza is the idea
   expressed by "free," "liberty," "freedom."

   With the Oxford Movement there was a dividing of the ways for English
   hymnody: on the one hand, a trend toward free range, toward new
   discoveries of reality through personal experience, and a will to be up
   and doing; on the other hand, a conservative regard for the past and a
   distrust of new things. The awakened interest in ancient liturgies
   naturally brought the Latin hymns into prominence. [117]John Mason
   Neale (1818-66), a young Cambridge scholar, joined the Oxford
   Tractarians and devoted his life thereafter largely to the study and
   translation of Latin and Greek hymns. And he could hardly have found a
   better way to help his cause. His translations aroused great admiration
   for the newly discovered ancient treasury, and new devotion to ancient
   liturgies and doctrines.

   Indeed, Neale and the group of which he was the poetical leader
   gradually took the position that only those hymns used of old times, or
   translations of them, were proper or lawful for the church service.
   This was the same position held by the partisans of Sternhold and
   Hopkins, except that the latter had wished to restrict hymnody to the
   Hebrew rather than to the Greek or Latin originals.

   It will be seen how the ritual hymn turned its face toward the acts and
   doctrines of the fathers, to saints' lives, and to holy days and
   seasons; how the Evangelicals cried, "The morning light is breaking; go
   labor on, spend and be spent"; and how the hymn-book in the passing
   years has taken the best poetry and the best religion of both sides and
   has brought them into a holy catholic harmony.

   Frederick Faber represents in his hymns the Roman Catholic and Neale
   the Anglican Catholic element of the Oxford Movement. Faber was
   graduated from Oxford in 1836; his completed "Hymns" containing 150
   pieces, was published in London in 1861. He says in the preface that he
   has been endeavoring to do for English Catholicism what Luther's,
   Wesley's, Cowper's, and Newton's and, later, the Oxford writers' hymns
   had done for Protestantism. His best and most catholic hymns are
   "[118]There's a Wideness in God's Mercy"; "[119]My God, How Wonderful
   Thou Art"; "[120]O, Come and Mourn with Me a While"; "[121]Faith of Our
   Fathers! Living Still"; "[122]Hark, Hark, My Soul, Angelic Songs Are
   Swelling"; "[123]O Paradise, O Paradise."

   The following hymn seems to represent the ideal of practical plainness
   in hymnody that, as he says at the outset, he is seeking to attain:


   O, it is hard to work for God,

   To rise and take the part,

   Upon this battlefield of earth

   And not sometimes lose heart!


   He hides himself so wondrously,

   As though there were no God;

   He is least seen when all the powers

   Of ill are most abroad.


   Or he deserts us in the hour

   The fight is all but lost,

   And seems to leave us to ourselves

   Just when we need him most.


   It is not so, but so it looks;

   And we lose courage then;

   And doubts will come if God has kept

   His promises to men.


   But right is right since God is God;

   And right the day must win;

   To doubt would be disloyalty,

   To falter would be sin.

   If one ask, Is this poetry? it may be replied, It is homely, plain
   language in rime and measured cadences intending to convey truth in
   such a way as to encourage people to live just lives, and to inspire
   faith in God. The hymn-book accepts it as a moderate hymn. Much of
   Faber's hymn verse is simple and practically good poetry. Some of his
   verse has an unhappy touch of physical grossness. Even the following
   childlike and tender address to the Deity is too physical; and it is
   not quite true either logically or artistically:


   I could not sleep unless Thy Hand

   Were underneath my head,

   That I might kiss it as I lay

   Wakeful upon my bed.

   Note how the following stanza has the same childlike qualities without
   what is objectionable:


   I worship thee, sweet will of God,

   And all thy ways adore;

   And every day I live I seem

   To love thee more and more.

   The hymn-book has happily left out the indecorous and has reserved the
   hymns of Faber that are pure gold. Faber himself was an erratic judge
   as well as writer of poetry. He burned his three-volume Shelley and, he
   says, never regretted it. Francis Thompson makes the remark that he
   should have thrown some of his hymnody into the fire with it. So
   might--and doubtless has--every poet destroyed to advantage some lines.
   The hymns containing the following verses have gone, with no loss to
   the hymnal:


   I heard the wild beasts in the woods complain.


   Man's scent the untamed creature scarce can bear

   As if his tainted blood defiled the air.


   Labor itself is but a sorrowful song

   The protest of the weak against the strong.

   Faber's "Pilgrims of the Night" is a hymn of deep loveliness:


   Hark! hark! my soul! angelic songs are swelling

   O'er earth's green fields and ocean's wave-beat shore;

   How sweet the truth those blessed strains are telling

   Of that new life where sin shall be no more.

   Angels of Jesus,

   Angels of light,

   Singing to welcome

   The pilgrims of the night!


   Onward we go, for still we hear them singing,

   "Come weary souls, for Jesus bids you come";

   And through the dark, its echoes sweetly ringing,

   The music of the gospel leads us home.

   Angels of Jesus,

   Angels of light,

   Singing to welcome

   The pilgrims of the night.


   Far, far away, like bells at evening pealing,

   The voice of Jesus sounds o'er land and sea;

   And laden souls by thousands meekly stealing,

   Kind Shepherd, turn their weary steps to Thee.

   Angels of Jesus,

   Angels of light,

   Singing to welcome

   The pilgrims of the night.


   Angels sing on! your faithful watches keeping;

   Sing us sweet fragments of the songs above;

   Till morning's joy shall end the night of weeping

   And life's long shadows break in cloudless love.

   Angels of Jesus,

   Angels of light,

   Singing to welcome

   The pilgrims of the night.

   Two stanzas, one beginning, "Cheer up, my soul!" and one containing the
   lines,


   God hides himself, and grace hath scarcely found us

   Ere death finds out his victims in the dark,

   have wisely been omitted. This is a hymn that "as the bird, wings and
   sings."

   Many, even most, of John Mason Neale's large number of translations
   issued around the middle of the century read like scholarly exercises
   in translation; they have not in them, somehow, the fire of poetry.
   Full of ecclesiastical imagery and symbols and briefly stated dogmas,
   they remind one of the ordinary conventional church windows. This is
   not saying that the church windows--and the verses--are not earnest
   enough. But their colors are often not rich, and the execution is often
   not very authentic. The following is an example from a eucharistic
   hymn:


   The Heav'nly WORD proceeding forth,

   Yet leaving not the FATHER'S side,

   Went forth unto his work on earth

   Until He reached life's eventide.


   By false disciples to be given

   To foemen for his death athirst,

   Himself the Bread of Life from Heaven,

   He gave to his disciples first.



   By birth their fellow man must be;

   Their meat when sitting at the board;

   He died their Ransomer to be;

   He ever reigns their great reward.

   Such symbolic terms for Christ as "Key of the house of David" and
   "Pelican of Mercy" are not convincing to the English ear.

   Whatever the following may be in another language, it is neither poetry
   nor hymnody in English:


   Him of the Father's very essence,

   Begotten ere the world began,

   And in the latter time of Mary,

   Without a human sire, made man.


   Unto Him, this glorious morn

   Be the strain outpoured!

   Thou that liftest up our horn,

   Holy art thou, Lord!



   The earthly Adam erewhile quickened;

   By the blest breath of God on high,

   Now made the victim of corruption,

   By woman's guile betrayed to die.


   He deceived by woman's part

   Supplication poured;

   Thou who in my nature art,

   Holy art thou, Lord.

   This shows the "liturgical" hymnody at the extreme toward which it is
   in danger of going. But the following translation shows what the
   hymnody of the old time may have for the English hymn-book with
   talented, devout, and scholarly men to translate them; they are Neale's
   masterpieces:


   Christian, dost thou see them

   On the holy ground,

   How the powers of darkness

   Rage thy steps around?

   Christian! up and smite them,

   Counting gain but loss,

   In the strength that cometh

   By the holy cross.


   Christian, dost thou feel them,

   How they work within,

   Striving, tempting, luring,

   Goading into sin?

   Christian, never tremble;

   Never be downcast;

   Gird thee for the battle;

   Watch and pray and fast.


   Christian, dost thou hear them,

   How they speak thee fair?

   "Always fast and vigil,

   Always watch and prayer?"

   Christian! answer boldly:

   "While I breathe I pray!"

   Peace shall follow battle,

   Night shall end in day.


   "Well I know thy trouble,

   O my servant true;

   Thou art very weary,

   I was weary too,

   And that toil shall make thee

   Some day all mine own,

   And the end of sorrow

   Shall be near my throne."

   Neale's dramatic lyric, "Art Thou Weary, Art Thou Languid?" is based
   upon an ancient Greek Christian hymn; it is a vivid and powerful poem:


   Art thou weary, art thou languid,

   Art thou sore distressed?

   "Come to me," saith One, "and coming,

   Be at rest."


   Hath he marks to lead me to him

   If he be my guide?

   "In his feet and hands are wound-prints,

   And his side."


   Is there diadem, as monarch,

   That his brow adorns?

   "Yea, a crown, in very surety,

   But of thorns."


   If I find him, if I follow,

   What his guerdon here?

   "Many a sorrow, many a labor,

   Many a tear."


   If I still hold closely to him,

   What hath he at last?

   "Sorrow vanquished, labor ended,

   Jordan passed."


   If I ask him to receive me,

   Will he say me nay?

   "Not till earth and not till heaven

   Pass away."


   Finding, following, keeping, struggling,

   Is he sure to bless?

   "Saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs,

   Answer, Yes.'"

   "[124]Jerusalem the Golden" is one of the three hymns taken from the
   long hymn "Gloria, Laus et Honor" by Bernard of Cluny; the others are
   "[125]Brief Life Is Here Our Portion" and "[126]For Thee, O Dear
   Country." Either the first or last of these would likely have made
   Neale a permanent place in the story of English song.

   Edward Caswall, a graduate of Brasenose College, Oxford, 1836, was like
   Faber a zealous disciple of Newman. He entered the priesthood of the
   Roman Catholic Church in 1850. He wrote and translated from the Latin
   and German about two hundred hymns. His best contributions are
   "[127]Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee," from the Latin of Bernard of
   Clairvaux, and "[128]When Morning Gilds the Skies," from a German hymn
   of unknown authorship, "Beim Fruehen Morgenlicht," published in
   Wurzburg, 1828. It begins:


   When morning gilds the skies,

   My heart, awaking, cries,

   May Jesus Christ be praised!


   Alike at work or prayer,

   To Jesus I repair,

   May Jesus Christ be praised!

   This hymn comes from Oxford University; Oxford was a spring of hymnody,
   as was Harvard in the United States. It is from the German.

   The romantic lore of German forest and castle, as well as the revival
   in German philosophy, science, theology, and poetry, influences English
   life and letters. The religious song of pre-Reformation Germany,
   fostered early by Notker and his followers, and brought by Luther and
   those who followed him into a luxuriant growth of splendid and powerful
   popular hymnody, had first begun to be heard in England through John
   Wesley and the Moravian immigrants. Now, under the new impulses,
   English hymnologists found much in the German to engage them. "There
   cannot be," says Philip Schaff, in Julian's "[129]Dictionary of
   Hymnology," "less than one hundred thousand published German hymns,
   nearly one thousand of which are classical and immortal."

   Of all these hymns certainly the best known, if not the best, is the
   "Ein Feste Burg" of Martin Luther. It is translated and sung in
   practically all the languages of the world. Julian's "Dictionary" gives
   a list of sixty translations in English alone. The best two renderings
   are Thomas Carlyle's "[130]A Safe Stronghold Our God Is Still" and
   Frederick H. Hedge's "[131]A Mighty Fortress Is Our God." In the
   English hymn-book, so far, that of Carlyle is the favorite; in the
   American, that of Hedge. Both renderings are picturesque and sturdy
   hymns. The American version is really the better. The first stanza of
   Carlyle's version is as follows:


   A safe stronghold is our God still,

   A trusty shield and weapon;

   He'll help us clear from all the ill

   That hath us now o'ertaken.

   The ancient prince of hell

   Hath risen with purpose fell;

   Strong mail of craft and power

   He weareth in this hour;

   On earth is not his fellow.

   Carlyle's version was published in 1831; Hedge's, which follows below,
   in 1858:


   A mighty fortress is our God,

   A bulwark never failing;

   Our helper he, amid the flood

   Of mortal ills prevailing.

   But still our ancient foe

   Doth seek to work us woe;

   His craft and power are great,

   And armed with cruel hate,

   On earth is not his equal.


   Did we in our own strength confide,

   Our striving would be losing;

   Were not the right Man on our side,

   The Man of God's own choosing,

   Dost ask who that may be?

   Christ Jesus, it is he;

   Lord Sabaoth is his name,

   From age to age the same,

   And he must win the battle.


   And though this world, with devils filled,

   Should threaten to undo us,

   We will not fear, for God hath willed

   His truth to triumph through us.

   The prince of darkness grim--

   We tremble not for him;

   His rage we can endure,

   For lo, his doom is sure,

   One little word shall fell him.


   That word above all earthly powers--

   No thanks to them--abideth;

   The spirit and the gifts are ours

   Through him who with us sideth.

   Let goods and kindreds go,

   This mortal life also;

   The body they may kill;

   God's truth abideth still,

   His kingdom is forever.

   This hymn has been like a flame and a cloud before the people through
   the years since Luther wrote it.

   Another great German hymn which has come with much spirit into the
   English hymn-book is "Versage Nicht, Du Haeuflein Klein," translated,
   "[132]Fear Not, O Little Flock, the Foe," by Catherine Winkworth. The
   authorship of the original is uncertain. It has been attributed to
   Gustavus Adolphus, who with his army sang it at the battle of Luetzen
   in 1631--triumphantly, although the king himself was mortally wounded
   in the battle.

   Eighty-four of the hymns of Paul Gerhardt (1607-76) have found their
   way into standard English hymn-books. An illuminating study has been
   made by Professor Theodore Brown Hewitt of Gerhardt's part in the
   making of the present English hymnal. [23] Dr. Hewitt lists over three
   hundred translations and adaptations from Gerhardt's hymn. Among these
   are: "[133]Commit Thou All Thy Griefs" and "[134]Give to the Wind Thy
   Fears," by John Wesley; "[135]All My Heart This Night Rejoices" and
   "[136]Since Jesus Is My Friend Here Can I Firmly Rest," by Catherine
   Winkworth; "How Shall I Receive Thee?" by A. T. Russell; and "[137]O
   Sacred Head Now Wounded," by J. W. Alexander, of Virginia. "Sacred
   Hymns from the German," a volume of translations by Francis E. Cox,
   published in 1841, contained the well known Easter hymn, "Jesus Lives,"
   "Jesus Lebt, mit Ihm auch Ich," by Christian Gellert (1715-69), and the
   hymn from Johann Scheffler (1624-77) beginning:


   Earth hath nothing sweet or fair,

   Goodly form or beauties rare,

   But before my eyes they bring

   Christ, of beauty source and spring.

   From the volume of Richard Massie we have the paraphrase, "I Know No
   Life Divided," of Carl Spitta's hymn, "O Jesu Meine Sonne."

   [138]Catherine Winkworth (1829-78) brought out in 1855 the [139]first
   volume of her series, "Lyra Germanica." She has given several fine
   hymns to the English hymn-book through these translations; besides
   those mentioned already are "[140]Now Thank We All Our God" and
   "[141]Gentle Shepherd, Thou Hast Stilled" and "[142]Now God Be with Us,
   for the Night Is Closing." The hymn of Joseph Mohr, "[143]Stille Nacht,
   Heilige Nacht," published in 1818 and translated by Jane Campbell in
   1863, has come to be one of the favorites of English Christmas hymns.

   Two other notable translators of German hymns were [144]Jane Borthwick
   and her sister Sarah Borthwick Findlater. They were born in Edinburgh.
   They published in four series, beginning 1854, "[145]Hymns from the
   Land of Luther." The best one of these, according to the selective
   judgment of the hymn-books, is that beginning, "[146]My Jesus, as thou
   wilt," from the original by B. Schmolke, "Mein Jesu, Wie Du Willst,"
   written in 1704:


   My Jesus, as thou wilt!

   O may thy will be mine;

   Into thy hand of love

   I would my all resign.

   Through sorrow and through joy,

   Conduct me as thine own,

   And help me still to say,

   "My Lord, thy will be done."


   My Jesus, as thou wilt;

   If needy here and poor,

   Give me the people's bread,

   Their portion rich and sure:

   The manna of thy word

   Let my soul feed upon;

   And if all else should fail,

   My Lord, thy will be done.


   My Jesus, as thou wilt,

   Though seen through many a tear,

   Let not my star of hope

   Grow dim or disappear;

   Since thou on earth hast wept

   And sorrowed oft alone,

   If I must weep with thee,

   My Lord, thy will be done.


   My Jesus, as thou wilt;

   All shall be well with me;

   Each changing future scene

   I gladly trust with thee.

   Straight to my home above,

   I travel calmly on,

   And sing in life or death,

   My Lord, thy will be done.

   A few extracts following indicate new elements of hymnody brought in
   from the German:


   Fair is the meadow

   Fairer still the woodland

   Robed in the blooming garb of Spring.

   Jesus is fairer, Jesus is purer,

   Who makes the woeful heart to sing.

   Published 1851. Both author and translator unknown.


   O Holy Ghost who brooded over the wave,

   Descend upon the child;

   Give him undying life, his spirit lave

   With waters undefiled;

   Grant him from earliest years to be

   Thy learner apt, a home for thee.

   Catherine Winkworth, from the German of Albert Knapp.


   Alleluya!

   The strain upraise of joy and praise,

   They through the fields of Paradise that roam,

   The blessed ones repeat through that bright home,

   Alleluya!

   The planets glittering on their heavenly way,

   The shining constellations join and say,

   Alleluya!

   Ye clouds that onward sweep,

   Ye winds on pinions light,

   Ye thunders echoing loud and deep,

   Ye islands wildly bright,

   In sweet content unite,

   Alleluya!

   J. M. Neale, from "The Sequence of Notker," in the "English Hymnal,"
   No. 974.

   Two of the best and most poetical hymns of to-day, "[147]Jerusalem, My
   Happy Home" and "[148]O Mother Dear, Jerusalem," did not come into the
   hymn-books generally until the second quarter of the last century,
   though they had been waiting in manuscript since the sixteenth century,
   till there was a call for them.

   The poem is printed in full in Julian's [149]Dictionary, page 580, from
   the manuscript in the British Museum. The title is "A Song Made by F.
   B. P. and to be Sung to the Tune of Diana." Stanzas besides the
   familiar ones in the two centos are:


   In thee noe sicknesse may be seene,

   Noe hurt, noe ache, nor sore,

   There is noe death, nor uglie devill,

   There is life forevermore.


   Noe dampishe miste is seene in thee

   No cloud, nor darksome night.

   There everie soule shines as the sunne,

   There God himself giues light.


   Thy turrettes and thy pinacles

   With carbuncles doe shine.

   Thy verie streetes are paved with gould,

   Surpassinge cleare and fine.


   Within thy gates nothinge doeth come

   That is not passing cleane.

   No spider's web, no durt, noe dust

   No filthe may there be seene.



   We that are here in banishment

   Continuallie doe moane.

   We sigh and sobbe, we weepe and weale,

   Perpetually we groane.



   But there they live in such delight

   Such pleasures and such play

   As that to them a thousand yeares

   Doth seeme as yeaster day.


   Thy viniardes and thy orchardes are

   Most beautifull and faire

   Full furnished with trees and fruits

   Most wonderful and rare.



   There is nectar and ambrosia made,

   There is muske and civette sweete.

   There manie a faire and daintie drugge

   Are trodden under feete.


   There cinamon and there sugar groes,

   There norde and balme abound.

   What tongue can tell or hart conceiue

   The ioies that there are found.


   Quyt through the streetes with silver sound

   The flood of life doth flowe

   Upon whose banks on everie syde

   The wood of life doth growe.


   There David standes with harp in hand

   As Maister of the Queere.

   Ten thousand times that man were blest

   That might his musieke hear.


   Our Ladie sings magnificat

   With tune surpassinge sweete,

   And all the virgins beare their parts

   Sitting about her feete.


   Te Deum doth Saint Ambrose singe,

   Sainte Augustine dothe the like.

   Ould Simeon and Zacharie

   Have not their songes to seke.


   There Magdalene hath left her mone

   And cheerfullie doth singe

   With blessed saints whose harmonie

   In everie streete doth ringe.


   Hierusalem my happie home,

   Would God I were in thee.

   Would God my woes were at an end

   Thy ioyes that I might see.

   A somewhat later version has this stanza:


   There be the prudent Prophets all,

   The apostles six and six;

   The glorious martyrs on a row

   And Confessors betwixt.

   The two hymns from this poem were especially pleasing to persons of
   high church tendencies. Some of the hymn-books have printed most of the
   stanzas, including the "spider's web" one. Nearly all the hymn-books
   to-day include at least one hymn from the poem.

   In a critical paper on "Hymns Ancient and Modern" in "The Saturday
   Review" for February 2, 1901, Mr. F. H. Balfour condemns this sort of
   hymn as being crassly materialistic and absurd. He thinks that such
   lavish use of gold and jewelry would make a city very glaring and
   unpleasant. The idea of gold- and silver-winged angels is illogical;
   the wings would not fold and unfold well, and they would be too heavy
   to fly with. One can hardly plead in defense of that phase of the hymn
   without in turn being absurd. The author of the hymn did not mean real
   gold. It is a figure of speech for the idea of splendid and fortunate
   estate and great happiness. Gold hair does not mean wire hair.
   Shakspere's "golden lads and girls" did not mean metal creatures. Of
   course the figures of the celestial city with walls of precious stones
   and gates of single pearls show an Oriental and naive lavishness of
   imagination. But after all, gold is a conventional word for splendor;
   and the idea of the hymn is to suggest even more richness than the
   words imply. These materials, gold, palaces, and jewels are among what
   Edmund Burke calls in his treatise "On the Sublime and Beautiful,"
   section vii, "those things in nature that raise love and astonishment
   in us." The names of these objects, Burke says, by long association
   with abstract ideas, such as, for example, ideas of splendor and
   happiness, gain great power to call forth those ideas. Further, if a
   number of such objects are named together they have a cumulative power
   for expressing the abstract idea. This section of Burke's theory of
   esthetics reads like a special vindication of this poem. I do not see
   how a poet could even contrive a figure of speech that was not
   radically of material substance. If the figures of this poetry suggest
   pawn-shops rather than supernal happiness, there is little to be said.
   Poetry does not with Bottom the Weaver stop to explain that the lion is
   not really a lion and that golden wings are not really gold.

   The charge against hymns of this kind that they are world-weary, and
   that the singer of them is too much occupied gazing toward the shade of
   the trees to do his work in the Lord's harvest field, is a more
   thoughtful criticism.

   Since the beginning of the nineteenth century, the hymn, having by that
   time defined itself as a distinct type of English verse, has more and
   more come to its place as a recognized literary form; and a large
   number of the more important poets have written hymns. Not all of them
   have done so; not all of them have had the strong religious impulse
   that is primarily requisite; not all of them who have written hymns had
   the gift of finding the phrase and verse form that would express their
   crowding ideas and emotions and that at the same time would observe the
   severe restraints that the communal song of worship commands.

   Shelley, like Burns, was swayed by emotions at least kin to religion;
   Wordsworth was profoundly religious. But their expression never took
   the true hymn form, though each wrote hymnic verse after a fashion.
   Shelley's "Song for the Men of England" is sung to-day with great
   feeling at meetings of political and social radicals; but it cannot be
   called a hymn. His "New National Anthem" beginning,


   God prosper, speed and save,

   God raise from England's grave

   Her murdered Queen!

   Pave with swift victory

   The steps of liberty

   For Britain's own to be

   Immortal Queen!

   is a spirited variation of "God Save the King." Its idea is much the
   same as that of a better known version, "My Country, 'Tis of Thee." The
   important distinction is that Shelley's song conceives liberty as a
   sort of French Revolution goddess; Smith's, as a human quality.
   "America" closes with a devout prayer. Another variation of "God Save
   the King" is in the hymn-book, "Come Thou Almighty King," a solemn and
   exalted hymn.

   Browning's "Prospice" has been set to music, but it is obviously not
   hymnal. His great death-song, the "Epilogue to Asolando," a mate to
   Tennyson's "Crossing the Bar," is, broadly speaking, religious in its
   assertion of individual and happy immortality for the brave, the good,
   and the true; yet it is not at all a churchly song. It is a cairn of
   heroic faith, built of rough stones thrown together--words like "fools"
   and "mawkish," and phrases such as "forward! back and breast as either
   should be" and "cry, Strive and thrive!'" Tennyson's song compared to
   it is like an altar of polished marble.

   In America, Emerson, Bryant, Longfellow, Whittier, Holmes, Lowell, and
   Lanier all contributed to the hymn-book. Poe wrote only some fragments
   of hymns.

   Wordsworth, as has been said, is represented in some of the hymn-books
   by one poem, which is called "The Laborer's Noonday Hymn." It is dated
   1834. The introductory stanzas describing the singers are of course
   omitted.


   Blest are the moments, doubly blest,

   That drawn from this one hour of rest,

   Are with a ready heart bestowed

   Upon the service of our God!


   Each field is then a hallowed spot,

   An altar is in each man's cot,

   A church in every grove that spreads,

   Its living roof above our heads.


   Look up to Heaven! the industrious sun

   Already half its course has run;

   He cannot halt or go astray,

   But our eternal spirits may.


   Lord, since his rising in the east

   If we have faltered or transgressed

   Guide from thy love's abundant course

   What yet remains of this day's course.


   Help with thy grace through life's short day

   Our upward and our downward way;

   And glorify for us the west

   When we shall sink to final rest.

   The poem is pious, wise, and substantial, but as a lyric it plods
   instead of mounting on wings. It has the air rather of being rimed
   moral sentiments written by the benevolent Wordsworth for the honest
   peasant than of being a song springing out of the genuine emotion
   either of the laborer or of the poet. It is not a good hymn.

   Wordsworth's nephew, Christopher Wordsworth (1807-85), Bishop of
   Lincoln, is a far better hymnist. He published in 1863 a volume, "The
   Holy Year," containing 127 original hymns. Eight or ten of these are in
   the hymn-books to-day. One or probably two are likely to survive as
   permanent great hymns.

   "[150]O Day of Rest and Gladness" is the best. It is distinguished by
   that lyrical volancy which William Wordsworth's hymn lacks. Bishop
   Wordsworth was a scholar and an influential churchman of his day. That
   all of his devoted effort and learning should produce but one or two
   great hymns is some indication of the difficulty of attaining to the
   precise balance of piety, simplicity, and poesy which the hymn type
   demands.

   Christina Rossetti wrote some ardent and delicately beautiful religious
   lyrics. But they are more for the closet of the mystic than for the
   public assemblage. It was not so with her father's Italian hymns. The
   hymns he wrote in Italy and the ardor with which they were sung were in
   some part the reason for his fleeing to England as a refugee from
   religious persecution in Italy. The hymns of Gabriele Rossetti are
   still sung by Italian Protestants. The religious songs of both
   Christina and Dante Rossetti are too florid and too recondite in
   sentiment for popular hymns.

   Stanzas of her "Advent Hymn" may be taken as typical. The poem is full
   of delicate and pleasant fancies; but these fancies have no special
   significance for the hymn. The sentiment is peculiar and would have
   little response from the common readers.


   In the bleak mid-winter

   Frosty wind made moan;

   Earth stood hard as iron,

   Water like a stone;

   Snow had fallen; snow on snow,

   Snow on snow,

   In the bleak mid-winter

   Long ago.



   Angels and archangels

   May have gathered there;

   Cherubim and Seraphim

   Through the air,

   But only his Mother

   In her maiden bliss

   Worshipped the Beloved

   With a kiss.

   These verses remind one of Blake, some of whose religious songs are
   delicately beautiful poems. But they are too delicate, and their poetic
   spell is too fragile for the public concourse. Take for example two
   stanzas from Blake's "On Another's Sorrow" in "Songs of Innocence":
   [24]


   Think not thou canst sigh a sigh,

   And thy Maker is not by;

   Think not thou canst weep a tear,

   And thy Maker is not near.


   O! he gives us to his joy

   That our grief he may destroy;

   Till our grief is fled and gone

   He doth sit by us and moan.

   One sees how the last line is necessarily individual; it might be
   exquisite to read by one's fireside, but it could not be applicable to
   public assemblages. The following stanzas from "Milton," with the
   motto, "Would to God that all the Lord's people were prophets," [25]
   are not far from sublime, yet one sees that they are not quite hymnody:


   Bring me my bow of burning gold!

   Bring me my arrows of desire!

   Bring me my spear! O clouds, unfold!

   Bring me my chariot of fire!


   I will not cease from mental fight,

   Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,

   Till we have built Jerusalem

   In England's green and pleasant land.

   The lines are truly lyric; they soar and they sing. But the aspiration
   is too immediately ambitious for a hymn. An assembly of people have to
   be moved by a strong impulse, indeed, to call in song for a chariot of
   fire. It is true that one of the most devout and popular of the
   American negro hymns calls for a chariot--


   Swing low, sweet chariot,

   Comin' for to carry me home--

   but the call is not immediate. It is a prayer that death, when it
   comes, may swing low like a chariot and carry the petitioner home.
   There is no note of impatience in it. But Blake's song has the mystic's
   impatience that few gatherings of folk would ever unitedly feel.

   Mrs. Browning's poem, "He Giveth His Beloved Sleep," seems to be on the
   verge of being a splendid hymn. Some of the hymn-books have it; some do
   not.


   Of all the thoughts of God that are

   Borne inward into souls afar,

   Along the psalmist's music deep,

   Now tell me if there any is

   For gift of grace surpassing this,--

   "He giveth his beloved sleep"?


   What would we give to our beloved?

   The hero's heart, to be unmoved,

   The poet's star-tuned harp, to sweep,

   The patriot's voice, to teach and rouse,

   The monarch's crown, to light the brows?

   "He giveth his beloved sleep."


   "Sleep soft, beloved!" we sometimes say,

   Who have no tune to charm away

   Sad dreams that through the eyelids creep:

   But never doleful dream again

   Shall break the happy slumber when

   "He giveth his beloved sleep."


   His dews drop mutely on the hill,

   His cloud above it saileth still,

   Though on its slope men sow and reap:

   More softly than the dew is shed,

   Or cloud is floated overhead,

   "He giveth his beloved sleep."

   The slightly too conventional "Now tell me--" and its slightly too
   familiar and rather peculiarly feminine use of the pronoun "we" are
   hindrances. A greater fault so far as hymnody is concerned is its
   speculative lack of directness, a kind of loitering. The idea is not
   swift and straight enough in its movement. Still, it is a religious
   lyric of unquestioned loveliness; if with adequate music it should be
   admitted to the hymn-book, it is likely to be, by its sincerity and
   tenderness and poetic charm, a favorite hymn. Only one other of the
   group of poems which Mrs. Browning published as "Hymns" is adapted to
   singing in public worship; it begins,


   Since without thee we do no good,

   And with thee do no ill.

   In the ten years following 1840 there is a perceptible ebb of hymnody
   until toward 1860, when a full tide sets in. There are still some
   magnificent hymns written, but they are not written with the
   exuberance, and in the full major key, of the hymns of the
   eighteen-thirties. A good proportion of the best hymns of this time are
   by women writers. One of the good hymns is that of Anna Bartlett
   Warner, who lived in New York. The Mendelssohn air, "Felix," has helped
   this hymn to go far.


   We would see Jesus; for the shadows lengthen

   Across the little landscape of our life;

   We would see Jesus, our weak faith to strengthen

   For the last weariness, the final strife.


   We would see Jesus, the great rock foundation

   Whereon our feet were set by sovereign grace:

   Nor life, nor death, with all their agitation,

   Can thence remove us, if we see his face.


   We would see Jesus; other lights are paling,

   Which for long years we have rejoiced to see;

   The blessings of our pilgrimage are failing;

   We would not mourn them, for we go to thee.


   We would see Jesus; yet the spirit lingers

   Round the dear objects it has loved so long,

   And earth from earth can scarce unclasp its fingers;

   Our love to thee makes not this love less strong.


   We would see Jesus; sense is all too blinding,

   And Heaven appears too dim, too far away;

   We would see thee, thyself our hearts reminding

   What thou hast suffered, our great debt to pay.


   We would see Jesus: this is all we're needing;

   Strength, joy, and willingness come with the sight;

   We would see Jesus, dying, risen, pleading;

   Then welcome day, and farewell mortal night.

   Another representative hymn by [151]Anna Laetitia Waring, a Welsh
   woman, has taken a high place:


   In heavenly love abiding,

   No change of heart shall fear;

   And safe is such confiding,

   For nothing changes here.

   The storm may roar without me,

   My heart may low be laid,

   But God is round about me,

   And can I be dismayed?


   Wherever he may guide me,

   No want shall turn me back;

   My shepherd is beside me,

   And nothing can I lack.

   His wisdom ever waketh,

   His sight is never dim,

   He knows the way he taketh,

   And I will walk with him.


   Green pastures are before me,

   Which yet I have not seen;

   Bright skies will soon be o'er me,

   Where darkest clouds have been.

   My hope I cannot measure,

   My path to life is free,

   My Saviour has my treasure,

   And he will walk with me.

   Mrs. Alexander's "[152]Jesus Calls Us o'er the Tumult" is a good hymn
   of this period. Mrs. Alexander was a native of Ireland and the wife of
   the bishop of Derry. Her hymn "[153]There Is a Green Hill Far Away" is
   one of a small number of English lyrics that owe their fame in large
   measure to the charm of the first line.

   Charlotte Elliott (1787-1871), who published her "Invalid's Hymn Book"
   in 1838 and "Hymns of Sorrow" two years later, was the author of about
   a hundred and fifty hymns, three of which have lived: "[154]Christian,
   Seek Not Yet Repose": "[155]My God, My Father, While I Stray": and
   "[156]Just as I Am without One Plea." Miss Elliott was herself an
   invalid for about fifty years of her long life. Her hymns, like those
   of Anne Steele, are plaintive and sweet in tone, and expressive of warm
   and beautiful devotion. The powerful lyric "Just as I Am without One
   Plea" would have made her fame secure. Lines from other hymns show the
   mingled strength and delicacy of her style, the nobility and sweetness
   of her character, and the genuine value of her religion.


   What though in lowly grief I sigh

   For friends beloved no longer nigh!

   Submissive still would I reply,

   "Thy will be done!"


   Though thou hast called me to resign

   What most I prized, it ne'er was mine;

   I have but yielded what was thine;

   "Thy will be done!"


   Let but my fainting heart be blest

   With thy sweet spirit for its guest,

   My God, to thee I leave the rest.

   "Thy will be done!"

   From a song less widely known, one can gather an idea of what the
   Christian means by the experience he calls prayer:


   My God, is any hour so sweet,

   From blush of morn to evening star,

   As that which calls me to thy feet,

   The hour of prayer?


   Blest is that tranquil hour of morn,

   And blest that solemn hour of eve,

   When on the wings of prayer upborne,

   The world I leave.


   Then is my strength by thee renewed;

   Then are my sins by thee forgiven;

   Then dost thou cheer my solitude

   With hopes of heaven.


   No words can tell what sweet relief

   Here for my every want I find;

   What strength for warfare, balm for grief,

   What peace of mind.

   Ohio contributes during this period one good hymn to the hymn-book,
   that of Phoebe Cary, beginning:


   [157]One sweetly solemn thought

   Comes to me o'er and o'er.

   The peculiarly effective first line of this poem would keep the poem
   alive even if the other lines were only moderately good. The whole hymn
   has the breath and color of poetry.

   George Washington Doane, who was, like Sears, a graduate of Union
   College, in New York, and who later became bishop of New Jersey, was
   the author of one of the favorite evening hymns, "[158]Softly Now the
   Light of Day," a graceful lyric, full of gentleness and piety.

   Another woman hymn writer of this period, though she is represented in
   hymn-books generally by but one hymn, stands nevertheless by virtue of
   that single lyric near to Watts and Wesley. Sarah Flower Adams was born
   in 1806. She was the daughter of Benjamin Flower, who was editor of the
   "Cambridge Intelligencer." She married William B. Adams, an eminent
   engineer, and himself a writer of some note in his day.

   The historian and critic of literature must search far to find songs of
   any kind equal to "[159]Nearer, My God, to Thee"; he will probably not
   find one superior to it. If there is anything lacking in this hymn to
   make a perfect song and an adequate expression of true religion, I am
   unable to say what it is. The hymn-book has made a slight revision in
   the mode of a verb in the fifth line of the first stanza of the
   original: "would be" is made to read "shall be." This is a delicate bit
   of adaptation, yet it is important. The slightly uncertain subjunctive
   was out of place in a poem of such clarity and power, and it is
   important to remove even the slightest let or hindrance to the sweeping
   power of one of the world's greatest songs of religion.

   The poem was published in 1841 at the close of an epoch of poetry such
   as England had not seen since the days of great Elizabeth. In its brief
   line--as also in the lines of Heber and others--we can see how the
   lyric of religion expresses in its own way the mind and spirit of its
   time; here we see the ardor of the age--its wildly free imagination,
   its mingled dreams and realities, its impetuous will, its soul of
   beauty--all reflected in the hymns of its religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [23] "Paul Gerhardt as a Hymn-Writer and His Influence on English
   Hymnody," Yale University, New Haven, 1918.

   [24] "The Poetical Works of William Blake," p. 78, Oxford edition.

   [25] Ibid., p. 370.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIII
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

   During the Victorian era, and more recently both in England and
   America, have appeared a remarkable number and variety of hymns.
   Several scores of these the hymn-book seems to have chosen permanently;
   many others have been chosen, of course, only tentatively. There are a
   few outstanding ones, like Kipling's "[160]Recessional" and Tennyson's
   "[161]Crossing the Bar," which leave little doubt of their permanence.

   In all the huge movement and stir in the last fifty years, there has
   been much vigorous manifestation of the religious life. It is not
   surprising that the fifteen years following the publication of Darwin's
   "Origin of Species" produced more ringing lyrics of religion than has
   any period of the same length in English history. There was tremendous
   agitation and conflict among religious forces. The zeal of the
   conservative faithful and the ardor of the progressive faithful showed
   itself in flashes of art as well as in the earnest, long-drawn, and
   bitter prosaic struggles.

   Hymns rich, intense, and luminous sprang from Conservatives and
   Progressives alike. And it is strong attestation of the truth and
   universality of the hymns that even radical Conservatives and radical
   Progressives were soon--however much or little they were aware of the
   fact--singing each other's hymns, "teaching and admonishing one
   another" according to the Scripture in spiritual songs, singing and
   making melody in their hearts unto the Lord. The Fundamentalists and
   the Liberals of to-day sing the hymns of Whittier and Holmes and Mrs.
   Adams, together with those of Bonar, Newman, and Bickersteth.

   Among the major hymnists of the time is Horatio Bonar, the foremost of
   the Scottish hymn-writers. He was born in Edinburgh in 1808. Graduated
   from the University of Edinburgh, he entered the ministry of the
   Established Church of Scotland, from which he later seceded to become
   one of the founders, and for the rest of his life a leader, of the
   Scottish Free Church. He died in 1889. He published many hymns, some
   translations from the Greek and Latin, but mostly original hymns.

   Among his best are "[162]A Few More Years Shall Roll"; "Beyond the
   Smiling and the Weeping"; "[163]Thy Way, Not Mine, O Lord"; "[164]I
   Heard the Voice of Jesus Say"; "[165]Here, O My Lord, I Meet Thee Face
   to Face"; and "[166]Go Labor On, Spend and Be Spent."

   Bonar's hymns are sorrowful and plaintive, like autumn winds over
   Scottish hills. The sadness and transience of life is a recurrent
   theme.


   A few more years shall roll,

   A few more seasons come;



   A few more storms shall beat

   On this wild, rocky shore.



   Beyond the frost-chain and the fever

   I shall be soon;

   Beyond the rock-waste and the river,

   Beyond the ever and the never

   I shall be soon.


   Toil on, and in thy toil rejoice;

   For toil comes rest, for exile, home;

   Soon shalt thou hear the Bridegroom's voice,

   The midnight peal, "Behold, I come."


   Make haste, O man, to live,

   Thy time is almost o'er

   O sleep not, dream not, but arise.

   The Judge is at the door!

   But the somber tone of his hymns is usually lightened by grave
   consolations and rock-founded hopes. His communion hymn, three stanzas
   of which are quoted here, is a wistful and heavenly minded song,
   intensely personal, yet broad enough, it would seem, for Christians of
   any and all opinions of that sacrament:


   Here would I feed upon the bread of God,

   Here drink with thee the royal wine of heaven;

   Here would I lay aside each earthly load;

   Here taste afresh the calm of sins forgiven.


   This is the hour of banquet and of song;

   This is the heavenly table spread for me;

   Here let me feast, and feasting, still prolong

   The brief, bright hour of fellowship with thee.


   I have no help but thine, nor do I need

   Another arm save thine to lean upon;

   It is enough, my Lord, enough indeed;

   My strength is in thy might, thy might alone.

   One of the best hymns of the nineteenth century is that of W. Walsham
   Howe (1823-97), Bishop of Wakefield, "[167]For All Thy Saints Who from
   Their Labors Rest." Others of his hymns are "[168]We Give Thee But
   Thine Own"; "[169]O Word of God Incarnate"; and "[170]O Jesus, Thou Art
   Standing."

   The version of the twenty-third Psalm that the hymn-book has pronounced
   most nearly adequate is that of the Rev. Sir Henry Williams Baker,
   "[171]The King of Love My Shepherd Is." It is not so good poetry as the
   twenty-third Psalm in the Authorized version of the Bible. Take, for
   example:


   He leadeth me beside the still waters,

   He restoreth my soul.

   Though the Psalm lines do not rime and are not measured, they express
   the thought as do no other grouping of words.


   Where streams of living water flow

   My ransomed soul he leadeth,

   And where the verdant pastures grow,

   With food celestial feedeth.

   This is good verse, but it is not the unalloyed poetic gold of the
   "prose" line.

   Baker's style is simple and pleasing, and his hymns have a ring of
   honesty in them all. He contributed thirty-three hymns to "Hymns
   Ancient and Modern" and four hymn tunes. He edited two other books of
   hymns, and, as chairman of the original board of directors of that
   greatest of English hymn-books, he exerted a wide influence. He was
   born in 1821, and died in 1877. This foremost hymnologist of the period
   was, like John Mason Neale, a Cambridge University man. His famous
   paraphrase was published in 1868:


   The King of love my Shepherd is,

   Whose goodness faileth never;

   I nothing lack if I am his,

   And he is mine forever.



   Perverse and foolish oft I strayed,

   But yet in love he sought me,

   And on his shoulders gently laid

   And home rejoicing brought me.


   In death's dark vale I fear no ill

   With thee, dear Lord, beside me,

   Thy rod and staff my comfort still,

   Thy cross before to guide me.


   And so through all the length of days,

   Thy goodness faileth never;

   Good Shepherd, may I sing thy praise

   Within thy house forever.

   "[172]For the Beauty of the Earth" was written by John Pierpont, a
   Unitarian minister who lived in Troy, New York. He was a graduate of
   Yale. He wrote some fifteen hymns, which maintain a good level of
   excellence. His "Hymn of the Last Supper" has marked qualities of
   simplicity, harmony, and devotion. But one sees that it is not strictly
   a hymn; it is rather a narrative than an expression of praise or
   petition. It is quoted here as an example of a good poem written
   expressly as a hymn, yet not a hymn at all:


   The winds are hushed, and a peaceful moon

   Looks down on Zion's hill;

   The city sleeps, 'tis night's calm noon,

   And all the streets are still,


   Save when along the shaded walks,

   We hear the watchman's call,

   Or the guard's footsteps as he stalks

   In moonlight on the wall.


   How soft, how holy is this light!

   And hark, a mournful song,

   As gentle as these dews of night

   Floats on the air along.


   Affection's wish, devotion's prayer,

   Are in the holy strain;

   'Tis resignation, nor despair,

   'Tis triumph, though 'tis pain.


   'Tis Jesus and his faithful few

   That pour that hymn of love;

   O God, may we that song renew

   Around that board above.

   The repetition of "'tis" and "that" in the last six lines are small
   defects of technique that would mar the hymn's success even though it
   were otherwise good. But if this is not a good hymn, how is it that
   William B. Tappan's somewhat similarly narrative and descriptive poem
   has been a favorite hymn for a hundred years since it was published?


   'Tis midnight, and on Olive's brow

   The star is dimmed that lately shone;

   'Tis midnight, in the garden now

   The suffering Saviour prays alone.


   'Tis midnight, and from all removed,

   Emmanuel wrestles long with fears;

   E'en that disciple whom he loved

   Heeds not his master's grief and tears.


   'Tis midnight, and for others' guilt

   The Man of sorrows weeps in blood;

   Yet he that hath in anguish knelt

   Is not forsaken by his God.


   'Tis midnight, and from ether-plains

   Is borne the song that angels know;

   Unheard by mortals are the strains

   That sweetly soothe the Saviour's woe.

   This poem is so vivid and tense with feeling that it begins to sing
   itself. Both in mood and form it is more purely lyric than the other.
   It has no such abstract phrases as "affection's wish" and "devotion's
   prayer." The second stanza of the first poem is vivid. But the stalk of
   the guard, and the moonlight on the wall, draw attention,
   inartistically, away from the center of the picture. There is no detail
   in the second poem which is not an undertone, and which does not set
   the central figure in higher light.

   [173]Francis Turner Palgrave (1824-97), of "[174]The Golden Treasury"
   and also of "[175]The Golden Treasury of Sacred Song," was himself the
   author of a volume of hymns. Three of these are in common use:
   "[176]Thou Sayest, Take Up Thy Cross"; "O Light of Life, O Saviour
   Dear"; and "O Thou Not Made with Hands." He wrote another remarkable
   religious lyric, one which is almost a great hymn. The style of this
   song recalls Burne-Jones and the Rossettis. But allowing all the beauty
   and all the religious value of the poem, one still feels that it is too
   fragile for a popular hymn; the figure, moreover, is drawn out till it
   is tenuous; the eighth line, beautiful as it is, is too subtle; and the
   third stanza is too naively didactic.


   Christ in his heavenly garden walks all day

   And calls to souls upon the world's highway;

   Wearied with trifles, maimed and sick with sin,

   Christ by the gate stands and invites them in.


   "How long, unwise, will ye pursue your woe?

   Here from the throne sweet waters ever go;

   Here the white lilies shine like stars above;

   Here in the red rose burns the face of Love.


   "'Tis not from earthly paths I bid you flee,

   But lighter in my ways your feet will be;

   'Tis not to summon you from human mirth,

   But add a depth and sweetness not of earth.


   "Still by the gate I stand as on ye stray;

   Turn your steps hither, am I not the Way?

   The sun is falling fast, the night is nigh;

   Why will ye wander, wherefore will ye die?"

   John Ellerton, who was born in London in 1828, wrote a large number of
   hymns, several of which are widely sung. The most familiar and perhaps
   the best is "[177]Saviour, Again to Thy Dear Name We Raise." Henry
   Twells, Canon of Peterborough Cathedral, wrote in 1868 the hymn
   beginning:


   [178]At even, ere the sun was set,

   The sick, O Lord, around thee lay;

   O in what divers pain they met,

   O with what joy they went away!

   John S. B. Monsell, a graduate of Dublin University and clergyman of
   the Church of England, was the author of the militant hymn, "[179]Fight
   the Good Fight." Another militant song of religion is that of Sabine
   Baring-Gould, "[180]Onward, Christian Soldiers," published in 1865, and
   married to the splendid processional music of Sir Arthur Sullivan in
   1871. The song makes a notable claim as to the power of hymnody:


   Hell's foundations quiver at the shout of praise.

   With these two hymns may be mentioned that of Henry Alford, Dean of
   Canterbury, "[181]Forward Be Our Watchword."

   A hymn by A. C. Benson may be mentioned in connection with the
   foregoing. It rather discounts the type of war heroism and speaks of
   higher heroism, of "scorned delights" and "lavished lives"--lavished in
   service rather than in destruction, and it looks for


   The far-off victories of love.

   William E. Gladstone, Thomas Hughes, W. B. Trevelyan, and Charles
   Kingsley were all contributors to the hymn-book at this time. The hymn
   of Kingsley, "From Thee All Skill and Science Flow," is by the verdict
   of the hymn-book the best of those written by this group.

   Of the American hymnists of the middle of the century and later there
   was a notable group of Harvard men, most of whom were Unitarians. Among
   them were Holmes, Lowell, Henry and [182]Samuel Longfellow, Samuel
   Johnson, and Theodore Parker.

   One of Holmes's best hymns, to which he gave the title "Trust," may be
   quoted:


   [183]O love divine, that stooped to share

   Our sharpest pang, our bitterest tear!

   On thee we cast each earth-born care;

   We smile at pain while thou are near.


   Though long the weary way we tread,

   And sorrow crown each lingering year,

   No path we shun, no darkness dread,

   Our hearts are whispering, Thou art near!


   When drooping pleasure turns to grief,

   And trembling faith is changed to fear,

   The murmuring wind, the quivering leaf,

   Shall softly tell us, Thou art near!


   On thee we fling our burdening woe,

   O love divine, forever dear;

   Content to suffer while we know

   Living and dying thou art near!

   William Cullen Bryant wrote the hymn of which the first two stanzas
   are:


   [184]O North with all thy vales of green,

   O South with all thy palms,

   From peopled towns and vales between,

   Uplift the voice of psalms;

   Raise, ancient East, the anthem high,

   And let the youthful West reply.


   Lo in the clouds of heaven appears

   God's well beloved Son;

   He brings a train of brighter years,

   His kingdom is begun.

   He comes a guilty world to bless

   With mercy, truth, and righteousness.

   It may be that the first stanza of this poem was originally conceived
   as a plea for reconciliation between the North and South; it was
   published in 1869.

   One of the best of all the American hymns is that of Samuel J. Stone,
   "[185]The Church's One Foundation," published in 1868. This poem has
   the strength, the simplicity, the dignity, the vividness, and the
   religious fervor that characterize every great hymn. One other hymn by
   this author may be justly called great:


   [186]Weary of earth, and laden with my sin,

   I look at heaven, and long to enter in;

   But there no evil thing may find a home;

   And yet I hear a voice that bids me, "Come."


   So vile am I, how dare I hope to stand

   In the pure glory of the holy land?

   Before the whiteness of the throne appear?

   Yet there are hands stretched out to draw me near.


   "[187]Christ to the Young Man Said, Yet One Thing More,'" was written
   by Henry W. Longfellow as a hymn to be sung at the ordination of his
   brother, Samuel Longfellow, to the Unitarian ministry. This is the only
   hymn, strictly speaking, that he wrote, though a number of his poems
   were included in the hymn-books of forty years ago.

   Samuel Longfellow wrote many hymns. He is represented in the various
   books to-day by from two to seventeen hymns. "O Still in Accents Sweet
   and Strong" and "[188]I Look to Thee in Every Need" are generally
   included. "[189]O God, Thy Children Gathered Here" he wrote for the
   ordination of Edward Everett Hale to the Unitarian ministry. Samuel
   Longfellow, with Samuel Johnson of Boston, edited three successive
   hymn-books. The last and largest volume, "Hymns of the Spirit," was
   published in 1864. Johnson's hymn, which is in virtually all of the
   present-day books, "[190]City of God, How Broad and Fair," closes with
   this stalwart verse:


   In vain the surge's angry shock,

   In vain the drifting sands;

   Unharmed upon the eternal Rock,

   The eternal city stands.

   A younger member of this group, and as a hymnist one of the foremost,
   is still living, the Rev. Frederick L. Hosmer. He, with Dr. William C.
   Gannett, author of "Praise to God and Thanks We Bring," is joint author
   of two volumes of religious lyrical poetry. The number of his hymns in
   various books ranges from three to thirty-five. "The English Hymnal"
   contains three. His "Father, to Thee We Look in All Our Sorrow,"
   "Forward through the Ages," and "O Beautiful My Country" are among his
   best.

   One of the best American hymnists is the New England Quaker, Whittier.
   The hymns of Whittier are in general accord with the other hymns of the
   time, and are fairly typical of the hymnody of the latter half of the
   century. It was during the decade of 1850-60 and shortly following that
   he wrote his best religious lyrical verse. His hymns, like the other
   good ones of the time, show signs of the battle between Science and
   Religion, as the opposing sides termed themselves. Whittier enters the
   field from the camp of Religion, but not to fight Science. Unlike
   Newman and "Little Bethel," or Huxley and Darwin, he did not accept one
   value and even pretend to close his eyes to the other. With plenty of
   human doubt and misgiving, he yet had a faith so deeply based that he
   had nothing but welcome for whatever truth Science or any other agency
   might bring forth.

   The hymn of Whittier's which the hymn-books seem to agree upon as the
   best is taken from his "Brewing of Soma." Beginning with the
   description of a wild Vedic religious rite, this poem goes on:


   The morning twilight of the race

   Down sends their native psalms

   And still with wondering eyes we trace

   The simple prayers of Soma's race

   That Vedic verse embalms.


   As in that child-world's early year,

   Each after year has striven

   By music, incense, vigils drear,

   And trance, to bring the stars more near,

   Or lift men up to heaven.


   Some fever of the blood and brain,

   Some self-exalting spell,

   The scourger's keen delight of pain,

   The dervish dance, the Orphic strain,

   The wild-haired Bacchant's yell,--


   The desert's half grown hermit, sunk

   The saner brute below;

   The naked Santon, Hashish-drunk,

   The cloister-madness of the monk,

   The fakir's torture show!


   And yet the past comes round again,

   And new doth old fulfil;

   In sensuous transports, wild as vain,

   We brew in many a Christian fane

   The heathen Soma still.


   Dear Lord and Father of mankind,

   Forgive our foolish ways;

   Reclothe us in our rightful mind,

   In purer lives thy service find,

   In deeper reverence, praise.


   In simple trust like those who heard,

   Beside the Syrian sea,

   The gracious calling of the Lord,

   Let us like them without a word,

   Rise up and follow thee.


   O Sabbath rest of Galilee!

   O calm of hills above,

   Where Jesus knelt to share with thee,

   The silence of eternity,

   Interpreted by love!


   With that deep hush subduing all

   Our words and works that drown

   The tender whisper of thy call,

   As noiseless let thy blessing fall

   As fell thy manna down.


   Drop thy still dews of quietness,

   Till all our strivings cease;

   Take from our souls the strain and stress,

   And let our ordered lives confess

   The beauty of thy peace.


   Breathe through the heat of our desire

   Thy coolness and thy balm;

   Let sense be dumb, let flesh retire;

   Speak through the earthquake, wind and fire,

   O, still, small voice of calm!

   This poem furnishes some illustration to the study of the nature of the
   Christian hymn. It is a religious poem part of which is quite unhymnal
   and part of which constitutes one of the supreme hymns of the language.
   And there is not a shadow of doubt as to the line where the poem ceases
   to be one kind, and becomes clearly and entirely the other kind, of
   lyric. With the line,


   The heathen Soma still,

   a poetical thunder-storm suddenly ceases, and the poem passes into
   lyric sunshine:


   Dear Lord and Father of mankind.

   The hymnal part of the poem is treasured in the memory of myriads of
   people; the other part is nearly forgotten.

   There is no reason to say that when Whittier wrote these particular
   stanzas he had any idea of their being set to music and put into
   hymn-books. "A good hymn," he once said, "is the best use to which
   poetry can be devoted, and I do not claim that I have succeeded in
   composing one."

   The Friends were not given to hymn-singing. As he says in his poem,
   "Worship,"


   To worship rightly is to love each other,

   Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer.

   But he caught the hymn inspiration here, and though he was very likely
   not aware of it, the poem at a certain point catches step and marches
   in the noble company of the world's great hymns.

   He was afraid of narrowness and spite; not of any new revelation that
   science might give, nor of the old truth that religion might assert. He
   was severe toward scientific as well as religious bigotry. In "The
   Quest" he says, "The riddle of the world is understood only by him who
   feels that God is good as only he can feel who makes his love the
   ladder of his faith." In "Our Master," written in 1863, is the
   following stanza typical of Whittier, and reflecting something of the
   times:


   Not thine the bigot's partial plea,

   Nor thine the zealot's ban;

   Thou well canst spare a love of thee

   That ends in hate of man.

   From the stanzas of the poem the hymn-books have made two hymns,
   "[191]Immortal Love Forever Full" and "We May Not Climb the Heavenly
   Steep." His longer poem, "The Eternal Goodness," 1863, furnishes
   several splendid hymns to various books. Stanzas from it are:


   I walk with bare, hushed feet, the ground

   Ye tread with boldness shod;

   I dare not fix with mete and bound

   The love and power of God.


   Yet in the maddening maze of things,

   And tossed by storm and flood;

   To one fixed hope my spirit clings;

   I know that God is good.


   I know not where his islands lift

   Their fronded palms in air,

   I only know I cannot drift

   Beyond his love and care.

   Bishop Phillips Brooks wrote one of the most beautiful hymns in
   celebration of Christmas:


   [192]O little town of Bethlehem,

   How still we see thee lie!

   Above thy deep and dreamless sleep

   The silent stars go by;

   Yet in thy dark street shineth

   The everlasting Light.

   The hopes and fears of all the years

   Are met in thee to-night.

   One of the most spirited of all hymns, a lyric that has something of
   the militant zeal of the ancient song of Deborah, is Julia Ward Howe's
   song of the Civil War:


   [193]Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord;

   He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored;

   He hath loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift sword.

   His truth is marching on.


   I have seen him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps;

   They have builded him an altar in the evening dews and damps;

   I can read his righteous sentence in the dim and flaring lamps.

   His day is marching on.


   I have read a fiery gospel writ in burnished rows of steel;

   "As ye deal with my contemners, so with you my grace shall deal.

   Let the hero, born of woman, crush the serpent with his heel,

   Since God is marching on."

   For its fire of poetic inspiration, its triumphant faith in God and in
   the future of humanity, and for its vivid beauty, there are few hymns
   to match it. This hymn is not in the English hymn-books. One reason for
   the omission is that the original title, "Battle Hymn of the Republic,"
   might imply it to be exclusively an American hymn. Yet some of the best
   American books omit it. It may be that its martial images seem to them
   too vivid to be interpreted as of spiritual warfare only.

   "[194]Eternal Ruler of the Ceaseless Round" was written by John W.
   Chadwick in 1864. He was a Unitarian minister of Brooklyn, New York:


   Eternal Ruler of the ceaseless round

   Of circling planets singing on their way;

   Guide of the nations from the night profound

   Into the glory of the perfect day,

   Rule in our hearts, that we may ever be

   Guided and strengthened and upheld by thee.


   We would be one in hatred of all wrong,

   One in our love of all things sweet and fair,

   One with the joy that breaketh into song,

   One with the grief that trembles into prayer,

   One in the power that makes thy children free

   To follow truth and thus to follow thee.

   These lines of peace and good will are especially significant as coming
   at a time so full of hate and slaughter.

   Adelaide Proctor was the author of a number of good hymns; the best is
   probably the one beginning:


   [195]My God, I thank thee, who hast made

   The earth so bright,

   So full of splendor and of joy,

   Beauty and light;

   So many glorious things are here

   Noble and right.

   Adelaide Proctor was a Roman Catholic. She was a musician and poet, the
   daughter of Barry Cornwall.

   A hymn by Elizabeth Clephane stands out clearly both for its devotion
   and its poetry. The stanza following illustrates the place of nature in
   hymnal poetry to express and to stir devotion:


   [196]Beneath the cross of Jesus

   I fain would take my stand,

   The shadow of a mighty rock

   Within a weary land;

   A home within the wilderness,

   A rest upon the way,

   From the burning of the noontide heat,

   And the burden of the day.

   A stanza from a hymn by John Ellerton suggests the hope of religion in
   helping to master the new complexities of life:


   Thine is the loom, the forge, the mart,

   The wealth of land and sea;

   The world of science and of art,

   Revealed and ruled by thee.

   Mary Lathbury's simple hymn of two stanzas, "Break Thou the Bread of
   Life," is a masterpiece of hymnody. The familiar hymns of Frances R.
   Havergal and of Mary Ann Thompson are likely to live and do good for a
   long time.

   One must not neglect to mention the Christmas hymn of J. G. Holland,
   "There's a Song in the Air," and the strong hymn of John Hay, "Defend
   Us, Lord, from Every Ill," and that of Washington Gladden, "[197]O
   Master, Let Me Walk with Thee."

   Samuel Dryden Phelps (1816-95), a Baptist divine of New Haven,
   Connecticut, was the author of a hymn of great strength and tenderness,
   "Saviour, Thy Dying Love."

   Sidney Lanier's exquisite "Ballad of Trees and the Master" has been
   included in several of the later hymn-books.

   Fanny J. Van Alstyne Crosby (1820-1915) has exerted a tremendous sway
   through her hymns of sweet and kindly sentiment and of rapt devotion.
   The wide success of her scores of hymns is due in part to the
   sentimental appeal of their tunes as well as of their words; it is also
   in part due to their folk-song clearness and easy rhythmic swing. But
   it is due in a larger part to their humble piety, as naive and full of
   wonders and self-searchings as that of some poetical saint of the early
   church.

   "Work for the Night is Coming" was written by Anna Walker Coghill, who
   was born in England in 1836; "More Love to Thee, O Christ" was written
   by Elizabeth Prentiss of Portland, Maine; "[198]Eternal Father, Strong
   to Save," by William Whiting (1825-78), master of the Winchester
   Choristers' School; "I Love to Tell the Story" and "Tell Me the Old,
   Old Story" are by Katherine Hankey, who was born in 1846. The latter
   song is a cento from her "Life of Christ" in verse.

   The hymns of the last two decades of the nineteenth century are not, so
   far, numerous in the hymn-book. The following stanzas of a hymn by
   Arthur C. Ainger seems to be typical of the better hymns of the last
   years of the century:


   From utmost East to utmost West,

   Where'er man's foot has trod,

   By the mouth of many messengers

   Goes forth the word of God;

   Give ear to me, ye continents,

   Ye isles, give ear to me;

   The earth shall be filled with the glory of God,

   As the waters cover the sea.


   March we forth in the strength of God,

   With the banner of Christ unfurled,

   That the light of the glorious gospel of truth

   May shine throughout the world:

   Fight we the fight with sorrow and sin

   To set their captives free,

   That the earth may be filled with the glory of God,

   As the waters cover the sea.

   There is in these lines a hopefulness for better days in the world
   generally. Their outlook is worldwide; they stress the call of
   Christianity for justice and harmony in international relations. The
   people who sing such songs as this are quite abandoned hypocrites if
   their votes do not begin to register some of the sentiments they sing
   so lustily. This hymn of Ainger's is not a plea for narrow
   ecclesiastical advantage, but rather for a broad enlightenment,
   justice, and charity.

   The hymn of Rudyard Kipling written for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen
   Victoria in 1897 is representative of the new sort of hymnody. It has
   taken its place in most of the good hymnals. Such an early and general
   acceptance shows that it has caught the ear and struck the right chord,
   at least for the present generation. Whether it will hold a high place
   with "O God, Our Help in Ages Past," "Jesus, Lover of My Soul," "Lead,
   Kindly Light," of course no one can tell. It seems to answer the
   demands of good hymnody. It moves off in a grand sweeping first line
   that sounds like Milton, or, in a smaller field, like Watts at his
   best. Its phrases have a sounding smoothness that gratifies the ear,
   fills up the voice, and lingers in the memory. Its images are vivid,
   clear-cut, readily apparent. Its thought moves swiftly and directly
   forward. And it is alive with the spirit of religion.

   Although the hymn is written in the language of modern life, it is full
   of biblical solemnities of diction and luxuriance of figure. This
   combination of military and biblical tone is not artificial. The poet's
   life, one remembers, is saturated with the spirit of the British army
   and navy; and, on the other hand, both of his grandfathers were
   Methodist preachers. For the biblical influence, notice for example the
   lines:


   The tumult and the shouting dies,

   The captains and the kings depart.

   In Job 36:25 we find this phrase:


   The thunder of the captains and the shouting.

   It is interesting to notice the same idea and words in Lowell's
   "Commemoration Ode":


   Great captains, with their guns and drums,

   Disturb our judgment for an hour,

   But at last silence comes;

   Then all are gone.

   The lines,


   Beneath whose awful hand we hold

   Dominion over palm and pine,

   as well as these from Emerson's "Wood Notes,"


   And grant to dwellers with the pine

   Dominion o'er the palm and vine,

   may be reminiscent of the sixth verse of the eighth Psalm:

     Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands: thou
     hast put all things under his feet.

   Kipling's "Recessional" may be based partly on the nineteenth Psalm.
   Watts's hymn, a direct paraphrase, begins,


   O God, our help in ages past;

   Kipling's,


   God of our fathers, known of old;

   the Psalm,

     Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

   Let us compare further the two hymns with another part of the psalm
   carrying the same idea:


   The shouting and the tumult dies,

   The captains and the kings depart.



   Far-called, our navies melt away;

   On dune and headland sinks the fire:

   Lo, all our pomp of yesterday

   Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!


   Time, like an ever-rolling stream,

   Bears all her sons away;

   They fly forgotten as a dream

   Dies at the opening day.

     Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep; in the
     morning they are like grass which groweth up. In the morning it
     flourisheth and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and
     withereth.

   The hymn-book is of course based on the Bible. It would be an easy but
   endless task to show the direct and indirect dependence of the hymns
   upon Scripture texts. Watts's and Kipling's hymns are cited as typical.

   This recessional hymn would seem to be a major song of the race by yet
   another test, that of almost universal applicability. It holds, as
   'twere, the mirror up to nature--individually and internationally--so
   as to be startling to those who look intently at it.

   Here is a later hymn, published by John Oxenham in 1915:


   Lord, God of hosts, whose mighty hand

   Dominion holds on sea and land,

   In peace and war thy will we see

   Shaping the larger liberty.

   Nations may rise and nations fall,

   Thy changeless purpose rules o'er all.


   For those who weak and broken lie

   In weariness and agony,

   Great healer, in their beds of pain,

   Come, touch and make them whole again.

   O, hear a people's prayer and bless

   Thy servants in their hour of stress.


   For those to whom the call shall come

   We pray thy tender welcome home;

   The toil, the bitterness all past,

   We trust them to thy love at last,

   O, hear a people's prayer for all

   Who nobly striving nobly fall!


   For those who minister and heal

   And spend themselves, their skill, their zeal;

   Renew their hearts with Christ-like faith

   And guard them from disease and death.

   And in thine own good time, Lord, send

   Thy peace on earth till time shall end.

   This hymn evidently arose in the midst of war. We may place this hymn
   beside Kipling's or one of Watts's or Wesley's and see a good hymn in
   comparison with great ones.

   The following stanza is from a hymn, "Our Father, Thy Dear Name Doth
   Show"; it seems to have the modern spirit:


   Bring in, we pray, the glorious day,

   When battle-cries are stilled;

   When bitter strife is swept away,

   And hearts with love are filled.

   O help us banish pride and wrong

   Which, since the world began,

   Have marred its peace; help us make strong

   The brotherhood of man.

   Perhaps the most widely accepted hymn written since the opening of this
   century is a hymn by the Rev. Frank Mason North. It is a hymnic cry out
   of the travail and misery of the modern city.


   Where cross the crowded ways of life,

   Where sound the cries of race and clan,

   Above the noise of selfish strife,

   We hear thy voice, O Son of man!


   In haunts of wretchedness and need,

   On shadowed thresholds dark with fears,

   From paths where hide the lures of greed,

   We catch the vision of thy tears.


   From tender childhood's helplessness,

   From woman's grief, man's burdened toil,

   From famished souls, from sorrow's stress,

   Thy heart has never known recoil.


   The cup of water given for thee

   Still holds the freshness of thy grace;

   Yet long these multitudes to see

   The sweet compassion of thy face.


   O Master, from the mountain-side,

   Make haste to heal these hearts of pain,

   Among these restless throngs abide,

   O tread the city's streets again.


   Till sons of men shall learn thy love

   And follow where thy feet have trod;

   Till glorious from thy heaven above

   Shall come the city of our God.

   There is a growing interest in hymn-singing and in the hymn itself as
   poetry. There are still tawdry hymns with silly music printed by the
   car-load and taught to children who will grow up rather ashamed that
   they know them. But the good hymns of faith still go on. There are
   doubtless hymns of integrity and power being written now. Glancing
   through the indexes of authors in recent hymn-books, one finds such
   names as Canon Ainger, Felix Adler, the Duke of Argyll, Robert Bridges,
   G. K. Chesterton, Henry Sloane Coffin, Havelock Ellis, Rudyard Kipling,
   Henry Van Dyke, and Israel Zangwill. From the hymns written to-day,
   there may be gathered some lasting world-hymns.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX
THE IMPORT OF THE HYMN-BOOK

   As mankind's most ancient and most beloved kind of poetry, the hymn is
   characterized by depth of thought, by patent serviceableness, and by
   lasting beauty. Any kind of art, any form of expression whatever, to be
   perenially fresh and dear to men must be at once profound, relevant,
   and comely. The constant returning of generation after generation to
   the hymnal as to Jacob's well attests the depth and soundness and
   beauty of it. The hymn-book is a lasting popular Outline of Life, a
   lyric handbook of philosophy, ethics, and spiritual beauty.

   The hymn-book contains a system of philosophy; short and simple as
   these lyrics are, they have given to innumerable minds a satisfying
   answer to the question of the source, the nature, and the end of all
   things. They assert that the origin and support of all life is eternal
   God, infinitely knowing, just, and kind. The hymn-book teaches a system
   of ethics; it asserts that man can know, and ought to do, the will of
   God. The hymn-book teaches a system of esthetics; it asserts that life
   finds its perfect bloom of beauty and its crown of happiness only in
   accord with the nature and will of God.

   The wise and the prudent may make pause at the hymn's simple and
   audaciously confident assertions as to the great mysteries that baffle
   all the faculties of reason; yet the more wise and prudent hold that
   poets and prophets can, by the power of chastened imagination, faith,
   inspiration, go surely beyond the common faculties of reason,
   experiencing, as Wordsworth says,


   a blessed mood

   In which the burden of the mystery,

   In which the heavy and the weary weight

   Of all this unintelligible world,

   Is lightened;

   and they "see into the soul of things."

   The hymn-book bases its system upon manifold and powerful authority.
   The hymns, being the thought of strong and deeply experienced souls,
   kindled into song, claim (1) the regal authority of Poetry. Having a
   sweeping acceptance by all sorts and conditions of men of religion,
   they claim (2) the authority of democratic election. Being the choric
   voice of organized religion speaking out of its ages of experience and
   out of its present life, they claim the authority of (3) the church
   catholic. Being, much of it, paraphrase of the Psalms and all of it, in
   accord with the Bible, the hymnal claims (4) the authority of the Holy
   Scriptures.

   Further, says Charles Wesley's hymn,


   A thousand oracles divine

   Their common beams unite.

   The hymns, then, speak of the origin of all things in terms of certain
   knowledge. A hymn by John Sterling published in 1840 begins with these
   lines:


   O Source divine, and Life of all,

   The fount of being's wondrous sea,

   Thy depth would every heart appall

   That saw not love supreme in thee.

   A hymn by Oliver Wendell Holmes speaks in simple words of the great
   mystery:


   Lord of all being, throned afar,

   Thy glory flames in sun and star;

   Center and source of every sphere,

   Yet to each loving heart how near!

   The Hebrew psalm, turned into English numbers by Isaac Watts, thus
   asserts the eternity of all-ruling Deity:


   Before the hills in order stood,

   Or earth received her frame,

   From everlasting thou art God,

   To endless years the same.

   Another hymn by Watts asserts the eternal supremacy of God--the primary
   hymnal theme:


   Thy throne eternal ages stood,

   Ere seas or stars were made.



   Eternity with all its years

   Stands present in thy view;

   To thee there's nothing old appears,

   Great God, there's nothing new.

   Many of the hymns speak of this inward assurance of God being
   corroborated by the testimony of external nature, especially in the
   grander aspects such as sunrise, storms, mountains, and the sky at
   night. Again to quote Watts, who is speaking evidently from his own
   emotions as well as from the artistic and spiritual tradition of the
   Psalms:


   Those mighty orbs proclaim thy power;

   Their motions speak thy skill;

   And on the wings of every hour

   We read thy patience still.

   Lines such as the following gleaned from the hymn-book carry on the
   same idea, creation declaring the Creator:


   Thou who has sown the sky with stars, setting thy thoughts in gold--

   The very dust inbreathed by thee, the clods all cold and dead,

   Wake into beauty and to life, to give thy children bread.

   Burton.


   When morning gilds the skies,

   My heart awakening cries.

   Caswall, from the German.


   When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers--

   The Eighth Psalm.


   He plants his footsteps in the sea,

   He rides upon the storm.

   Cowper.


   And bright is his path on the wings of the storm.

   Grant.

   Addison's familiar and ornate lines repeat the ancient inspired idea,
   "The heavens declare the glory of God":


   The spacious firmament on high,

   With all the blue ethereal sky,

   The spangled heavens, a shining frame,

   Their great Original proclaim.

   Lines from Sir Robert Grant's hymn, "O, Worship the King," spring
   evidently from a contemplation of the sky:


   O tell of his might, O sing of his grace,

   Whose robe is the light, whose canopy space.


   Thy bountiful care what tongue can recite?

   It breathes in the air, it shines in the light.

   The hymns declare that human beings may have sure apprehension of the
   infinite spirit, and communion with it:


   His very word of grace is strong

   As that which built the skies;

   The voice that rolls the stars along

   Speaks all the promises.

   Watts.

   An American hymn by Frederick L. Hosmer asserts the reality of human
   acquaintanceship with the personality of God:


   O thou in all thy might so far,

   In all thy love so near,

   Beyond the range of sun and star,

   And yet beside us here:


   What heart can comprehend thy name;

   Or searching find thee out,

   Who art within a quickening flame,

   A Presence round about?

   Two lyrical statements of this basic idea in the Bible, one in the Old
   Testament, one in the New, are unsurpassed in grandeur of conception
   and splendor of expression; they are true hymns, though as yet there is
   no adequate metrical version in English. Perhaps there will never be.
   The passages state in ultimate words the idea of the immanence and
   permanence of Deity:


   Whither shall I go from thy Spirit?

   Or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

   If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there:

   If I make my bed in the grave, behold thou art there.

   If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of
   the sea;

   Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

   If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be
   light about me.

   Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the
   day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

   The passage from the New Testament, part of a letter of St. Paul to the
   Romans, is an outburst of song:

     For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
     principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
     nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
     separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

   It is no wonder that jail-doors would not hold in front of a man who
   could write songs like this in his letters and sing them in jail at
   night; even the


   Gates of hell shall never,

   as Baring-Gould's hymn says, be able to hold before such songs and
   souls.

   The philosophy, the deep and steadfast belief, of these two ancient
   hymns is that of the modern hymn-book. Its lyrical great argument is to


   assert eternal Providence,

   And justify the ways of God to men.


   The God of Abraham praise,

   Who reigns enthroned above;

   Ancient of everlasting days,

   And God of love.

   Thomas Olivers.


   For light and love, for rest and food,

   For daily help and nightly care,

   Sing to the Lord for he is good,

   And praise his name, for it is fair.


   Crown him the Lord of years,

   The Potentate of time,

   Creator of the rolling spheres,

   Ineffably sublime.

   Matthew Bridges.


   Holy, holy, holy! all the saints adore thee,

   Casting down their golden crowns around the glassy sea;

   Cherubim and seraphim falling down before thee,

   Which wert and art and evermore shalt be.


   Holy, holy, holy! though the darkness hide thee,

   Though the eye of sinful man thy glory may not see,

   Only thou art holy, there is none beside thee,

   Perfect in power, in love, and purity.

   Heber.


   Sun, moon and stars fulfill

   Their time by thee;

   Angels to do thy will

   Fleet lightnings be;

   Rain, hail, and frost and snow,

   And all the winds that blow

   Are at thy nod;

   Oceans and tempests know

   Their mighty God.


   His wisdom ever waketh,

   His sight is never dim,

   He knows the way he taketh,

   And I will walk with him.

   Anna L. Waring.


   Still, still with thee, when purple morning breaketh,

   When the bird waketh, and the shadows flee;

   Fairer than morning, lovelier than daylight,

   Comes the sweet consciousness, I am with thee.

   Harriet Beecher Stowe.

   But the hymns, with all their brave certainty about the order and
   direction of the universe, make no claim to have sounded all its
   depths; they know for sure, but they do not know all. To quote again
   from Matthew Bridges's hymn:


   No angel in the sky

   Can fully bear that sight,

   But downward bends his burning eye

   At mysteries so bright.

   Another hymn thus expresses the idea of the smallness of man's highest
   conception before the reality:


   I cannot find thee, e'en when most adoring;

   Before thy throne I bend in lowliest prayer;

   Beyond these bounds of thought, my thought upsoaring,

   From farthest quest comes back; thou art not there.


   Yet high above the limits of my seeing,

   And folded far within the inmost heart,

   And deep below the depths of conscious being,

   The splendor shineth; there, O God, thou art.

   Stowe.

   Whittier in his "Eternal Goodness" has this stanza about the smallness
   and yet the certainty of man's knowledge:


   I know not what the future hath

   Of marvel or surprise;

   I only know that life and death

   His mercy underlies.

   We know, says the hymn, that unlimited Good is above and beyond the
   visible world wherein we see His power. The hymn-book is not
   pantheistic, if pantheism is identifying the Absolute merely with
   creation.


   Thy voice produced the seas and spheres,

   Bade the waves roar, the planets shine;

   But nothing like thyself appears

   Through all these spacious works of thine.


   Who can behold the blazing light?

   Who can approach consuming flame?

   None but thy Wisdom knows thy might;

   None but thy Word can speak thy name.

   The last two lines of this hymn by Watts touch on the mystery of the
   Trinity: Divinity can be apprehended only by means of Divinity--the
   eternal wisdom, proceeding from God into human mind, perceives the true
   incarnate Word. A hymn by Samuel Wesley, father of John and Charles
   Wesley, shows the same process of thought:


   Hail, Father, whose creating call

   Unnumbered worlds attend;

   Who art in all, and over all,

   Thyself both source and end,



   Not quite displayed to worlds above,

   Nor quite on earth concealed,

   By wondrous unexhausted Love

   To mortal man revealed.

   The same humility but surety of faith is seen in Newman's "Lead, Kindly
   Light," and likewise in a hymn of Thomas Wentworth Higginson, which is
   not so well known as it may be:


   No human eye thy face may see,

   No human thought thy form may know;

   But all creation dwells in thee,

   And thy great life through all doth flow.


   And yet, O strange and wondrous thought!

   Thou art a God who hearest prayer;

   And every heart with sorrow fraught,

   To seek thy present aid may dare.

   The modern hymnal statement of its philosophy, its thought about the
   order and direction of the universe, is briefly and simply stated, but
   unshakably certain:


   In heavenly love abiding,

   No change my heart shall fear;

   And safe is such confiding,

   For nothing changes here.

   The storms may roar without me,

   My heart may low be laid,

   But God is round about me,

   And can I be dismayed?

   Anna L. Waring.


   The King of love my shepherd is,

   Whose goodness faileth never;

   I nothing lack if I am his

   And he is mine forever.

   Baker.


   Majestic sweetness sits enthroned

   Upon the Saviour's brow;

   His head with radiant glories crowned,

   His lips with grace o'er flow.

   Stennett.


   Holy Spirit, faithful Guide,

   Ever near the pilgrim's side;

   Gently lead us by the hand,

   Pilgrims in a desert land.

   Wells.


   Sometimes a light surprises

   The Christian while he sings;

   It is the Lord who rises

   With healing in his wings.

   Cowper.


   How sweet the name of Jesus sounds

   In a believer's ear;

   It soothes his sorrows, heals his wounds,

   And drives away his fear.

   Newton.


   In simple trust like those who heard

   Beside the Syrian sea

   The gracious calling of the Lord,

   Let us, like them, without a word,

   Rise up and follow thee.

   Whittier.


   Love divine, all love excelling,

   Joy of heaven to earth come down;

   Fix in us thy humble dwelling,

   All thy faithful mercies crown.

   Wesley.

   These passages are illustrative of the hymn-book's affirmation
   concerning God and concerning man's approach to Him. It teaches that
   God is infinite in being, wisdom, love, and power. The book teaches
   further that the Infinite has shown His nature and will to this world
   in the person of Jesus Christ; that the Logos, Idea, Spirit, Word,
   which was in the beginning and without which was not anything made that
   was made, became flesh and dwelt among us, the Infinite became finite
   and visible, drawing man out of darkness, revealing the way of life,
   and showing that the universe is ordered by wisdom and love. And the
   hymn-book teaches further that infinite God revealed historically in
   the Son is yet ever-present Spirit, and that God is one. This
   constitutes the basic proposition of the hymnal philosophy.

   Then follows naturally a consideration of man--What is man that thou
   art mindful of him?--and of his duty and his destiny.

   Concerning the nature of man, the hymn-book holds that he is dust of
   the earth, plus the breath of God:


   His sovereign power without our aid,

   Made us of clay and formed us men.


   Frail children of dust, and feeble as frail.


   All valiant dust that builds on dust.


   His sovereign powers our bodies made,

   Our souls are his immortal breath.


   The soul of man, Jehovah's breath.

   Some of the old hymns call man worm in the dust; Darwin trailed him
   lower yet than the worm, to the germ--racially, that is, as elementary
   science traces him there individually; but the hymn-book, with Genesis,
   takes him, as we see, on down to inorganic dust itself.

   Thus, then, is summarized the hymn-book's philosophy concerning the
   origin and nature of man: Dust indeed he is, yet also breath of God;
   and it is the purpose of his life that the creature shall rise more and
   more out of the dust and become the child and friend of God. This is
   the duty and destiny of man.


   Higher and yet higher,

   Out of clouds and night;

   Nearer and nearer,

   Rising to the light.

   Anonymous.


   A charge to keep I have,

   A God to glorify;

   A never dying soul to save,

   And fit it for the sky.

   Wesley.


   What is my being but for thee,

   Its sure support, its noblest end,

   Thy ever smiling face to see

   And serve the cause of such a friend?

   Watts.

   The duty of man, declares the hymn-book, is to attain to God. This
   carries measureless implications of God-likeness in his being and
   behavior--the best use of all his faculties at their best; the exercise
   of perfect justice and mercy, for as man becomes more a son of God he
   becomes more a brother of man. The duty of man is then to climb upward
   to God. And the hymns say that there is one true Way.

   But man is free to choose his way. He is made so much in the image of
   God that he has the power of shaping life according to his own will.
   The sun, says William Wordsworth's hymn,


   can not halt or go astray,

   But our eternal spirits may.

   Being thus free, man does not have to rise. He can choose to go away
   from, rather than toward, the ultimate Good. And this is sin; sin is
   more than man's imperfection and his lowness in the scale. It is
   willing and doing contrary to the perfect will of God. And with sin is
   darkness and sorrow, hell, discord with God, and the stony necessity of
   repentance and redemption.

   Here, then, is the hymn-book's system of ethics, its consideration of
   the duty of free man, his struggle with adversity, his defeat of hell,
   and his attainment of heaven. The hymns speak with searching wisdom and
   deep appeal about the long journey that man must travel, and the true
   way.

   Of the future of man the hymn-book makes comprehensive and most
   steadfast affirmation. It affirms that the human race, under God, has
   shining days before it, and a prosperous journey. Before the hymns have
   done with this dust-creature man, they have advanced him to the state
   of a flaming seraph, crowned and, beyond all telling, free and
   glorious. But it is a strugglesome way.

   We say that the hymnal is a lyric handbook of practical living, if it
   is a book of glorious dreams. Life is short, says one of Wesley's
   hymns:


   Lo, on a narrow neck of land,

   'Twixt two unbounded seas, I stand.

   And man must be on his long way. Doddridge, following St. Paul, finds
   great zest in life--"as a strong man, to run a race":


   Awake, my soul, stretch every nerve,

   And press with vigor on;

   A heavenly race demands thy zeal,

   And an immortal crown.


   A cloud of witnesses around

   Hold thee in full survey;

   Forget the steps already trod,

   And onward urge thy way.

   But life, sings Toplady, is not all haste and urgency; duty may lead
   through peace as well as turmoil:


   If on a quiet sea

   Toward heaven we calmly sail,

   With faithful hearts, O God, to thee

   We'll own the favoring gale.


   But should the surges rise,

   And rest delay to come,

   Blest be the tempest, kind the storm,

   Which drives us nearer home.

   Sorrow and toil are part of the uphill journey, but even that may have
   its element of joy:


   Deem not that they are blest alone,

   Whose days a peaceful tenor keep;

   The anointed Son of God makes known

   A blessing for the eyes that weep.


   Nor let the good man's trust depart

   Though life its common gifts deny.



   For God has marked each sorrowing day,

   And numbered every secret tear;

   And heaven's long age of bliss shall pay

   For all his children suffer here.

   Bryant.

   Oliver Wendell Holmes believes it:


   Though long the weary way we tread,

   And sorrow crown each lingering year,

   No path we shun, no darkness dread,

   Our hearts still whispering, Thou art near!

   Isaac Watts sings out, as only Watts can express such ideas:


   Must I be carried to the skies

   On flowery beds of ease,

   While others fought to win the prize,

   Or sailed through bloody seas?


   No, I must fight if I should win,

   Increase my courage, Lord!

   The sturdy hymn of faith, "How Firm a Foundation," has this stanza:


   When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie,

   My grace all sufficient shall be thy supply,

   The flame shall not hurt thee; I only design

   Thy dross to consume and thy gold to refine.

   One of Bonar's hymns begins:


   Go, labor on, spend and be spent,

   Thy joy to do the Father's will.

   The best lyrics of the hymn-book, and the favorite ones, are those
   expressive of human insufficiency and loneliness. They are much more
   than intellectual realization of the fact; they are cries of longing
   for fellowship with God.


   Jesus, lover of my soul,

   Let me to thy bosom fly,

   While the nearer waters roll,

   While the tempest still is high.


   Sun of my soul, thou Saviour dear,

   It is not night if thou be near;

   O may no earth-born clouds arise

   To hide thee from thy servant's eyes.

   "Abide with Me" expresses the same insufficiency and peril of life, and
   longing for completeness and solid standing:


   Abide with me from morn till eve,

   For without thee I cannot live;

   Abide with me when night is nigh,

   For without thee I cannot die.


   So long thy power hath blest me, sure it still

   Will lead me on,

   O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till

   The night is gone.

   "Nearer, My God, to Thee" condenses in a stanza the gist of the
   hymn-book's whole theory of life and its meaning and end:


   There let the way appear,

   Steps unto heaven:

   All that thou sendest me

   In mercy given:

   Angels to beckon me

   Nearer, my God, to thee,

   Nearer to thee!

   Now, when souls have found that fellowship, they desire to share it;
   this indeed is the final test of whether they have found it. A hymn by
   John Chadwick (1840-1904) is a good summary of this idea:


   Eternal Ruler of the ceaseless round

   Of circling planets singing on their way,

   Guide of the nations from the night profound

   Into the glory of the perfect day,

   Rule in our hearts that we may ever be

   Guided and strengthened and upheld by thee.


   We are of thee, the children of thy love,

   The brothers of thy well-beloved Son;

   Descend, O holy Spirit, like a dove

   Into our hearts that we may be as one,

   As one with thee to whom we ever trend,

   As one with him, our Brother and our Friend.


   We would be one in hatred of all wrong,

   One in our love of all things good and fair,

   One with the joy that breaketh into song,

   One with the grief that trembles into prayer,

   One in the power that makes thy children free

   To follow truth, and thus to follow thee.


   O clothe us with thy heavenly armor, Lord--

   Thy trusty shield, thy sword of love divine:

   Our inspiration be thy constant word;

   We ask no victories that are not thine:

   Give or withhold, let pain or pleasure be,

   Enough to know that we are serving thee.

   The city of God, says a hymn by Palgrave--of "The Golden Treasury"--is


   Where'er the gentle heart

   Finds courage from above,

   Where'er the heart forsook

   Warms with the breath of love,

   Where faith bids fear depart,

   City of God, thou art.


   Where in life's common ways,

   With cheerful feet we go,

   Where in his steps we tread

   Who trod the way of woe,

   Where he is in the heart,

   City of God, thou art.

   One of the most familiar of modern hymns, Bishop Heber's "From
   Greenland's Icy Mountains," this figures human duty and its fulfilment:


   They call us to deliver

   Their land from error's chain.

   Waft, waft, ye wings, his story,

   And you, ye waters, roll,

   Till like a sea of glory,

   It spreads from pole to pole.

   Favorite among the hymns are those of mutual encouragement and
   exhortation, such as "Onward, Christian Soldiers," "Christian, Dost
   Thou See Them?" and "Blest Be the Tie That Binds."

   The passion of the hymn-book for world-wide enlightenment and justice
   and peace is vividly expressed in some of the best hymns. Especially
   have some of the more recent hymns stressed social responsibility as a
   direct method of forwarding the purpose of creation. They expect the
   world to be less and less a wilderness of woe; they expect crooked
   paths to be made straight for the children of men, and deserts to
   blossom as the rose. This will all come with growing Christian
   enlightenment and practice.


   'Mid the homes of want and woe,

   Strangers to the living word,

   Let the Saviour's heralds go,

   Let the voice of hope be heard.


   To the weary and the worn

   Tell the realm where sorrows cease;

   To the outcast and forlorn

   Speak of mercy and of peace.


   Guard the helpless, seek the strayed,

   Comfort trouble, banish grief,

   In the might of God arrayed,

   Scatter sin and unbelief.

   Bishop Howe.

   One notices the ring of militant evangelism in these hymns:


   O Zion, haste, thy mission high fulfilling.



   Behold how many thousands still are lying

   Bound in the darksome prison-house of sin.



   Proclaim to every people, tongue and nation

   That God in whom they live and move is Love.



   Give thy sons to bear the message glorious;

   Give of thy wealth to speed them on their way;

   Pour out thy soul for them in prayer victorious.


   When people sing such zealous ideas as these, they may bring surprising
   things to pass. This zeal brings to mind such traveling souls as
   Livingstone, John Wesley, Roger Williams, the French priests among our
   West and Northwest wilds, St. Augustine in England, and St. Paul
   himself smiling over the catalogue of his missionary hardships.

   Isaac Watts, looking ahead from the end of the seventeenth century, is
   confident as to the influences of such evangels:


   People and realms of every tongue

   Dwell on his love with sweetest song,

   And infant voices shall proclaim

   Their early blessings on his name.


   Blessings abound where'er he reigns;

   The prisoner leaps to loose his chains,

   The weary find eternal rest,

   And all the sons of want are blest.

   Alexander Pope, Roman Catholic contemporary of non-conforming Watts,
   writes with equal conviction and splendor:


   Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!

   Exalt thy towering head and lift thine eyes.



   See barbarous nations at thy gates attend,

   Walk in thy light, and in thy temple bend.

   William Cullen Bryant writes out of the spirit of Puritan New England:


   Send forth thy heralds, Lord, to call

   The thoughtless with the hardened old,

   A wandering flock, to bring them all

   To the Good Shepherd's peaceful fold.

   And Samuel Longfellow:


   O still in accents strong and sweet

   Sounds forth the ancient word,

   More reapers for the harvest field,

   More laborers for the Lord.

   The hymnal Utopia, an ideal city, built to music, to deep harmonies of
   grace and truth, is much spoken of, and it is imaged forth in great
   light and splendor. There is a spiritual city, not built with hands,
   invisible in the heavens; and there is to be also on the earth a state
   built after the celestial likeness--the Kingdom of Heaven, the City of
   God.

   To attain this city is the purpose of man's journey that he calls life.
   Individuals may be citizens of the kingdom, enriched with its
   privileges and delights long before the human race in general shall
   come to it; at the same time the hymns see the whole world moving
   toward it. Hymns new and old announce the coming kingdom and the City
   of God.


   All the world shall come to serve thee,

   And bless thy glorious name;

   And thy righteousness triumphant

   The island shall proclaim.

   Israel Zangwill, translated from the Hebrew. "Union Hymnal."


   Older sages saw it dimly,

   And their joy to madness wrought;

   Living men have gazed upon it,

   Standing on the hills of thought.

   Havelock Ellis.


   O sometimes gleams upon my sight,

   Through present wrong, the eternal Right;

   And step by step since time began,

   I see the steady gain of man.

   Whittier.


   And when the strife is fierce, and the warfare long,

   Steals on the ear the distant triumph song.

   And hearts are brave again, and arms are strong.

   Alleluia!

   Bishop Howe.


   From step to step it wins its way

   Against a world of sin:

   Part of the battle-field is won,

   And part is yet to win.

   William G. Tarrant.


   Thy kingdom come, O Lord,

   Wide circling as the sun.

   Fulfill of old thy word,

   And make the nations one.


   One in the bond of peace,

   The service glad and free

   Of truth and righteousness,

   Of love and equity.



   Till rise at last to span

   Its firm foundations broad,

   The commonwealth of man,

   The city of our God.

   Frederick L. Hosmer.


   Mercy and truth that long are missed,

   Now joyously are met;

   Sweet peace and righteousness have kissed,

   And hand in hand are set.


   Truth from the earth, like to a flower,

   Shall bud and blossom then,

   And justice from her heavenly bower

   Look down on mortal men.

   John Milton.


   When knowledge, hand in hand with peace,

   Shall walk the earth abroad--

   The day of perfect righteousness,

   The promised day of God.

   Frederick L. Hosmer.


   Hail the glorious golden city

   Pictured by the seers of old!

   Everlasting light shines o'er it,

   Wondrous tales of it are told:

   Only righteous men and women

   Dwell within its gleaming wall;

   Wrong is banished from its borders,

   Justice reigns supreme o'er all.

   Felix Adler.


   Hark, how from men whose lives are held

   More cheap than merchandise,

   From women straggling sore for bread,

   From little children's cries,

   There swells the sobbing human plaint

   That bids thy walls arise.


   Give us, O God, the strength to build

   The city that hath stood

   Too long a dream, whose walls are love,

   Whose ways are brotherhood,

   And where the sun that shineth is

   God's grace for human good.

   W. Russell Bowie.


   Not throned above the skies,

   Not golden walled afar,

   But where Christ's two or three

   In his name gathered are,

   Be in the midst of them

   God's own Jerusalem!

   Francis Turner Palgrave.


   O beautiful for patriot's dream

   That sees beyond the years,

   Thine alabaster cities gleam

   Undimmed by human tears!

   Katherine Lee Bates.

   Some of these hymns have a very modern ring; and yet their basic idea
   goes back very far in the world's best recorded thought. All the better
   if it is spoken in the phrase of modern life.

   Their visions of better times for the human race in the world, pictured
   with such reality of conviction, seem humanly plausible. There are all
   sorts of agencies busy. What we call science is a wonderfully good, if
   a sometimes pert, servant of God; its freeing man from the old fears
   that used to bedevil his life, from the terrible plagues and famines,
   from the grinding toil that blinds the mind and deadens the spirit--all
   this is something. Now, with the new freedom and leisure and power that
   man is getting, the hymn-book thinks, he has most to fear and guard
   against himself; he must have purity of heart and humility of spirit
   and good will toward man. To quote from Kipling's hymn:


   The tumult and the shouting dies;

   The captains and the kings depart;

   Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,

   An humble and a contrite heart.

   Lord God of hosts, be with us yet,

   Lest we forget,--lest we forget.

   As to the life after death, the hymn-book is triumphantly certain.
   Strangely at the darkest point of human experience, the contemplation
   of death and decay, the hymns grow most sanguine.


   It is not death to bear

   The wrench that sets us free

   From dungeon chain, to breathe the air

   Of boundless liberty.


   It is not death to fling

   Aside this sinful dust,

   And rise on strong exultant wing

   To live among the just.

   This life at best is very short.


   Our years are like the shadows

   On sunny hills that lie,

   As grasses of the meadow

   That blossom but to die;

   A sleep, a dream, a story

   By strangers quickly told,

   An unremaining glory

   Of things that soon are old.

   And death for the just is but going to a happy and permanent home.


   There is a land of pure delight

   Where saints immortal reign;

   Infinite day excludes the night,

   And pleasures banish pain.

   But the City of God which the hymns predict will rise in the earth as
   the climax of human welfare and felicity is, they say, only the earthly
   counterpart of the celestial City of God.


   Jerusalem the golden,

   With milk and honey blest!

   Beneath thy contemplation

   Sink heart and soul oppressed:

   I know not, O I know not

   What joys await us there,

   What radiancy of glory,

   What bliss beyond compare.


   For thee, O dear, dear, country,

   Mine eyes their vigils keep,

   For very love beholding

   Thy happy name, they weep.



   O Mother dear, Jerusalem,

   When shall I come to thee?

   When shall my sorrows have an end?

   Thy joys when shall I see?


   O happy harbor of the saints!

   O sweet and pleasant soil!

   In thee no sorrow may be found,

   No grief, no care, no toil.


   Thy gardens and thy gallant walks

   Continually are green;

   There grow such sweet and pleasant flowers

   As nowhere else are seen.

   The most familiar figure portraying the ultimate destiny of the human
   soul is that of singing praises to God with the accompaniment of harps
   around the throne in the holy city. It is an attempt to picture the
   ultimate height of duty achieved and therefore the ultimate height of
   felicity.


   Ten thousand times ten thousand

   In sparkling raiment bright,

   The armies of the ransomed saints

   Throng up the steeps of light:


   'Tis finished, all is finished,

   Their fight with death and sin;

   Fling open wide the gates of gold,

   And let the victors in.


   What rush of alleluias

   Fills all the earth and sky!

   What ringing of a thousand harps

   Bespeaks the triumph nigh!

   Henry Alford.


   From every clime and kindred

   And nations from afar,

   As serried ranks returning home

   In triumph from a war,

   I heard the saints upraising,

   The myriad hosts among,

   In praise of him who dies and lives

   Their one glad triumph song.

   G. Thring.


   To thee all angels cry aloud;

   The heavens and all the powers therein;

   To thee cherubim and seraphim continually do cry.

   This trope of singing hymns has been since misty ancient times the most
   acceptable symbol that poets could find of the idea. But a symbol is no
   more than a symbol. The too literal mind is sure to find trouble with
   the figure; yet there is great call to thought in it. The harp means
   music, and that implies sweetness, harmony, order--diversity becoming
   higher unity. Human souls in concord with celestial harps will be as
   notes in divine music, each itself, and all a perfect unity, a harmony
   of praise. Praise. It seems safe to say that from the time when one of
   mankind first looked up with a gleam of intelligence in his eyes, this
   matter of ascribing worthship has been an important concern of his
   life; according to the records, it has occupied much of the time and
   attention of various peoples--it is in most languages the first
   syllable of recorded thought. And it has doubtless been one of man's
   most practically useful occupations.

   For praise is looking up with admiration and love to an ideal. It is
   prizing superior might, intellect, or beauty. It is a contemplation of
   perfection, or of the best ascertained idea of perfection, with a
   firing of the emotion to delight and acclamation, and a stirring of the
   will to approach, to emulate, and to find union with that perfection.
   Contemplation calls the ideal Truth. The will names it Duty. The
   emotion calls it Beauty as the high object of its delight.

   And the use of praise--the practical effect of this contemplation and
   acclamation of what is higher, this finding of something to raise the
   eyes unto, to wonder at, and to rise toward--has been to furnish a
   desirable end to otherwise confused and divergent trails of life, to
   raise a unifying standard, and to give to mankind a common view of what
   Plato calls "the road of their longing and the quality of their souls."

   Contemplation of higher perfection with love and delight, that is
   praise, and that is what the hymnal images as the highest employment of
   the soul; and that is the heart of the hymn-book.

   The symbol of praise in the form of song looks especially toward
   emotion which man puts into melody of tone and rhythm. Song is the
   blossoming of emotion. Here the whole is typified by its flower, joy in
   the contemplation of all-pervading Good raising the voice into lyric
   beauty. Significant, too, is the detail picturing the lyric acclaim as
   being also choric. This is a most social and catholic figure conceiving
   souls at the highest employment and in joyful concord.

   The details of the figures, gold and precious stones, white garments,
   palms, and crowns, have been dimmed by custom; yet they have thrilled
   people for ages, and are still to sensitive imaginations full of
   richness and splendor of meaning. The hymn means by jewels, doubtless,
   freedom from all conceivable poverty; by white garments, the cleanness
   which humanity really has in mind for itself and longs for; by palms,
   the triumph of the soul's faculties; by crowns, the hope of the earth
   toward which democracy is stretching its hands--the hope that every man
   shall be free, absolute rightful monarch of his own being, respecting
   his neighbor's kingship as his own--a divine democracy where all are
   crowned royalty. This is not the citizenry of old begging friars and
   anemic clerks that the young cavalier feared to find in heaven; the
   lowest of this citizenry is grander than all medieval knights and
   ladies and kings and queens whatsoever. And the holy city is no
   outpost, but the capital center of all might, holy benevolence,
   spotless grace, and immortal joy.

   These dreams and visions of the hymn-book are so plausible and
   beautiful that unlettered folk take them as words of truth and hope,
   and hold them always in their memory; yet there is no mind so strong of
   wing that it is not challenged by these songs to soar to heights beyond
   its reach. The harmony of the hymnal voices, too, is symbolic of the
   harmony it would foster among men. In the hymn-book the parties, the
   Anglicans, Baptists, Unitarians, Methodists, Roman Catholics, Eastern
   Catholics, Lutherans, Presbyterians, and some members of no church, are
   together in deep accord. Its greatest contributor is a Jewish king.
   Augustine, Bernard of Cluny, Isaac Watts, and John Mason Neale were far
   apart in time and circumstance, but very near together in "Te Deum
   Laudamus," "Urbs Beata Hierusalem," "Jesus Shall Reign," and "Jerusalem
   the Golden." Wesley and Toplady did not agree in some dogmas; but they
   sing with wonderful harmony in "Rock of Ages" and "Jesus, Lover of My
   Soul." Newman the Roman Catholic and Mrs. Adams the Unitarian were far
   apart in circumstance but near together in "Lead, Kindly Light" and
   "Nearer, My God, to Thee." Thomas Aquinas and Martin Luther are side by
   side in sweet accord when they sing songs of prayer and praise to God.
   The hymn-book is a great book for faith, hope, and charity--and
   especially for charity, the greatest of these.

   Now to summarize the teachings of this elect book of lyric poetry--this
   popular lyric manual of philosophy, ethics, and esthetics--about the
   beginning and end of all things: The beginning and end is God, and God
   is infinitely good, and the universe is therefore ordered and safe. He
   images forth his nature and will in the spheres that move to music and
   in the harmonies of a wind-flower beside the road; but above all other
   images of Him is man himself. And man, says the hymn-book, has the duty
   of fulfilling the will of God concerning him. But he is so God-like as
   to be free. He may go right or wrong, toward death and destruction or
   toward life and endless freedom and felicity.

   This is the body of the hymn-book. Its terse and apt injunctions to
   duty, its harmonious phrases speaking calmness of mind and steadiness
   of purpose, its gentle and graceful verses winning folk to peace and
   charity with their neighbors, its prayer for all sorts and conditions
   of men as brothers, its stern warnings, its ringing calls to
   uprightness and purity of life, its sweet rhythms of consolation and
   hope--all these things, sung by mothers to their children, learned, as
   our fine English idiom says, by heart, illuminated and colored by
   memorable airs and by recollections of scenes familiar and dear,
   hallowed often with memories of solemn and exalted experiences--make
   the hymn an invaluable force for good, and an ever-fresh inspiration to
   grace and comeliness of life.


