
PEARL 



A FOURTEENTH-CENTURY POEM 



RENDERED INTO MODERN ENGLISH BY 

G. G. COULTON, M.A. 

AUTHOR OF "MEDIEVAL STUDIES" 



LONDON 

DAVID NUTT, 57-59 LONG ACRE 

1906 





Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON <5r Co. 
At the Ballantyne Press 



PREFACE 

PROFESSOR PALGRAVE speaks of Pearl as "perhaps the 
most purely and ideally perfect specimen of our elder 
poetry which good fortune has left us " ; and few who 
have studied it carefully will dissent from his verdict. 
But the language of the poem is as much more difficult 
than Chaucer's, as Chaucer's is than Spenser's ; and 
even a willing student can scarcely read the original 
without much wearisome toil. The object of this little 
book is to supply the general reader with as close a 
version as possible in the metre of the original ; and 
to tempt some readers, perhaps, to study the difficult 
Middle English. 

Of the poet we know nothing but that he must 
almost certainly have been a contemporary of Chaucer, 
and the author of three other remarkable poems pre 
served in the same unique manuscript Cleanness, 
Patience, and Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight. For 



vi PREFACE 

textual criticism and interpretation of difficulties I 
am deeply indebted to Professor Gollancz's standard 
edition (D. Nutt, 1891). The preface to that edition 
has supplied the best discussion of the poem from what 
may be called the conservative standpoint ; but many 
of its conclusions must be corrected by comparison 
with two later essays by Dr. C. F. Brown and Professor 
W. H. Schofield in the Publications of the Modern 
Language Association of America, vol. xix. pt. i. (1904). 
Those scholars have traced the most important of the 
author's literary debts to the fourteenth eclogue of 
Boccaccio, to Boethius, and to the so-called Sir John 
Mandeville. His heaviest debt of all, to the Bible, 
will at once be obvious to all readers ; and those who 
are interested in medieval theology should not fail to 
read Dr. Brown's admirable remarks on this head. 
Dante students will notice at once how the author of 
Pearl, in spite of many similarities of treatment, differs 
widely from the great Florentine in attributing equal 
glory to all the Blessed in Heaven. But Dr. Brown, I 
believe, has been the first to point out how definitely 
the Englishman here breaks away from the traditional 
patristic view, and how thoroughly this agrees with his 
general religious attitude (< evangelical rather than 



PREFACE vii 

ecclesiastical." In this he is at one with Chaucer (so 
far as Chaucer deals seriously with religion), with the 
author of Piers Plowman, with the contemporary mystics 
of the Upper Rhine, and with the earlier stages of 
Wycliffism, before that movement entered upon its 
phase of definite revolt. Of revolt there is no trace 
in Pearl: but Dr. Brown rightly observes that the 
author insists especially upon doctrines which are as 
definitely Protestant as Roman Catholic, to the almost 
total exclusion of those points which divided the two 
Churches at the Reformation. 1 

But it is mainly as literature that I bring this poem 
before the general public ; as the sincere cry of a 
father's heart at the grave of his infant girl. There 
are few more powerful pictures in any language of 

1 Professor Schofield argues that the poem is a pure allegory 
rather than a personal story ; but the evidence he adduces tells 
heavily against his own theory on more than one point. More 
over, he betrays a fatal unfamiliarity with one important side of 
medieval life, ignoring the difference between the priesthood 
and those minor orders which frequently left the cleric free to 
marry. It is strange that the study of Piers Plowman should 
not have given the Professor an inkling of the true status of 
those clerici uxorati who were so common in the fourteenth 
century. Professor Brown (p. 126) falls into the same mistake, 
but with less damage to his argument. 



viii PREFACE 

sorrow and love, despair and reconciliation. His child 
had died before the end of her second year. Mourning 
one day under the trees that shaded her grave, he 
falls asleep, and sees in his dream the glorified spirit 
of his lost daughter. One by one she silences from 
Scripture all his rebellious thoughts and doubts, 
scarcely less peremptorily than Beatrice silenced 
those of Dante. By slow degrees his despair gives 
place to resignation ; and the poem ends with a 
stanza which has all the mysterious solemnity of a 
cathedral aisle. We may be painfully conscious of 
the superstitions and abuses that seem almost in 
separable from the later medieval conception of the 
Mass ; and yet those last five lines of Pearl will haunt 
us with the undying charm of the sister picture from 
In Memoriam. 

"... where the kneeling hamlet drains 
The chalice of the grapes of God." 



PEARL 



PEARL, pleasant to prince's pay, 1 

So daintily dight in gold so clear ! 

From orient lands, I hardily say, 

Was never seen a gem her peer ; 

So round, so comely every way, 

So small, so smooth her sides were, 

Wherever I judged of gems so gay, 

I set her single and singular. 

Alas ! in an arbour 2 I lost my dear, 
She slid through the grass into earth away : 
Now pine I despoiled of love's sweet cheer 
Of that spotless Pearl that was mine one day. 

1 Pleasure. 2 Any spot shaded by trees. 



PEARL 

Since in that spot from me she sprang, 
Oft have I waited there, wanting my weal, 
That once was wont to soothe all wrong, 
And to lighten my lot, and to bring me heal. 
Now pierceth my heart the bitter pang, 
Swelleth my breast with the sorrow I feel ! 
Yet never methinks was so sweet a song, 
As in that still hour to my soul doth steal ! 
But alas ! for my sense must stagger and reel 
To think of her comeliness clad in clay. 
O Earth ! thou hast set thy sordid seal 
On that spotless Pearl that was mine one day ! 



Needs must spices from that spot spread 

Where such riches to rot is run : 

Blossoms white and blue and red 

Glow there in glory against the sun : 

There may flower and fruit never fade, 

Where down she slid into earth so dun ; 

For the blade cannot grow till its grain is dead 

No wheat were else to the garner won. 

From good each good is ever begun, 

So seemly a seed can never decay ; 

Sweet flowers shall daily spread to the sun 

From that spotless Pearl that was mine one day. 



PEARL 3 

To that sweet spot of sad renown 

I entered, to that arbour green, 

In August, at the summer's crown, 

When corn is cut with sickles keen. 

The earth where once my Pearl rolled down 

Was shadowed with herbs full clear and sheen, 

Gillyflower, ginger and gromelion, 1 

And peonies powdered all between. 
But, fair and seemly as was that scene, 
Fairer the fragrance that floated away 
From the dwelling where gloweth in glory, I ween, 
That spotless Pearl that was mine one day. 

In that sad spot my hands I wrung 
For care full cold my breast that bound. 
Dinned in my brain a doleful song, 
Tho' reason soothed the rankling wound. 
I wept, with wayward wits unstrung, 
My Pearl that here lay underground : 
Though Christ's own lore sweet comfort sung, 
My wretched will to woe was bound. 

I fell upon that flowery ground ; 

Such drowsy scents my soul did sway, 

I slid into a sleeping-swound 

Of that precious Pearl that was mine one day. 
1 G-romwell or graymill (Lat. lithospcrmum). 



PEARL 

Thence sprang my spirit forth in space, 
While my body lay in earth-bound dream : 
My ghost is gone in Goddes grace 
To venture where strange marvels teem : 
I wist not where in the world it was, 
But I found myself where steep cliffs gleam ; 
Towards a forest I turned my face, 
Where rocks so radiant rich were seen 
No eye might bear their dazzling beam, 
Or the gleaming glory that from them glent. 
No blazoned tapestry e'er did seem 
So fair as this sight that God me sent. 



High crown'd is all that steep hillside 
With crystal cliffs so steep of kind, 
And woods and holts about them bide 
With stems as blue as blue of Ind ; 
And beams of burnished silver slide 
O'er trembling leaf and mossy rind. 
When gleam of glades did o'er them glide, 
With shimmering sheen full sharp they shined. 
A gravel on the ground did grind 
Of precious pearls of orient : 
The sun's own sheen was pale and blind 
Before that sight that God me sent. 



PEARL 

The sight of that hillside so clear 
Taught my sad soul all grief forget ; 
Such flavours fresh of fruits there were, 
The thought thereof doth stay me yet ; 
Fowls fluttered fearless here and there, 
Of flaming hues, both small and great. 
No zithern-string or dulcimer 
Could half their jocund mirth repeat : 

For, when those birds their bright wings beat, 
They sang with such a sweet consent, 
So gracious glee could no man get 
As this sweet sight that God me sent. 



All was so dight in dainty guise, 
This forest land where fate me set, 
No mortal tongue might e'er devise 
The beauteous sights mine eye that met ; 
I wander forth in blissful wise, 
No bank so big to daunt me yet ; 
The farther in, the fairer rise 
Fresh herb and fruit and floweret : 

Rich fields, with paths and hedgerows set ; 

Rough banks, as fretted gold that brent 

On either side the rivulet 

Such was the sight that God me sent. 



PEARL 

The glamour of that glorious deep 
Was banks beset with beryls bright, 
Whereby the sweet waves swirl and sweep, 
With gentle murmur flowing aright ; 
Down in the depths lay stones an heap, 
As painted windows glow with light, 
Or as twinkling stars, when the weary sleep, 
Stare from the welkin on winter night ; 

For every pebble that met my sight 

Was meet for royal ornament, 

And all the water was alight 

With this sweet sight that God me sent. 



This glorious sight of down and dale, 
Of water, wood, and noble plain, 
Stirred in me bliss, allayed my bale, 
Soothed my distress, destroyed my pain ; 
Beside those waves that softly steal 
I went in bliss, with teeming brain ; 
The farther I followed that watery vale, 
The mightier joy did my heart constrain, 
As fortune fares when she is fain, 
Send she solace or sadness sore, 
The wight on whom her gifts may rain 
Must chance to receive aye more and more. 



PEARL 

More of weal was in that wise 
Than I could tell, though I leisure had : 
For earthly heart might not suffice 
To grasp one tenth of that bliss so glad. 
1 seemed to see sweet Paradise 
Beyond those banks in verdure clad : 
That brook drew many a quaint device 
Of waters through the golden glade ; 
Beyond, beneath that slanting shade, 
I hoped to win the farther shore ; 
But the water was deep ; I dared not wade, 
Though ever I longed more and more. 



More and more, with anxious care, 
I yearned to see that brook beyond ; 
For if 'twas lovely where I could fare, 
Far lovelier was that farther land. 
I stayed my steps around to stare, 
In eager hope some ford to have found ; 
But perils more ywis there were, 
The farther I stalked by the strand. 
Yet never was I so unmann'd 
To turn away from that rich store 
Of fresh delights, so close at hand, 
That moved my mind aye more and more. 



PEARL 

More marvels now my soul beguiled ; 
I saw, beyond that merry mere, 
Bright crystal cliffs on bright cliffs piled, 
Radiant with rays that have no peer : 
At which cliff's foot there sat a child, 
A gracious maid, full debonnair : 
Her dazzling robe was undefiled ; 
I knew her well, I had seen her ere. 
As glistening gold, pure and sincere, 
So shone she on that shining shore : 1 
Long gazed I eagerly on her there ; 
The longer, I knew her more and more. 

The more I gazed on her fair face, 
And saw her make so sweet a show, 
The more I felt such gladdening grace 
As seldom had been mine ere now. 
I yearned to call her, but, alas ! 
Amazement dealt my heart a blow 
To see her in so strange a place, 
And made my reason bend and bow. 
When lo ! she raised her ivory brow, 
That such a look of sweetness wore, 
As stung my heart with numbing woe, 
And ever the longer the more and more, 
i cf. Dante, Purg. xxix. 1 and following. 



PEARL 

More than my yearning my dread arose, 

I bode full still and dared not call, 

With eyes wide open and mouth full close, 

I stood as tame as hawk in hall. 

Ghostly methinks was that purpose, 

Yet I feared lest it might at last befall 

That the prize might escape me which there I chose 

Ere I could make it mine withal. 

That gracious prize so free from gall, 

So smooth, so slender, so seemly slight, 

Rising up in array royal 

A precious Piece 1 with pearls bedight. 

Choicest pearls of royal price, 

There might man by grace have seen, 

While fair and fresh as fleur-de-lys 

She wandered down that limpid stream ; 

All glistering white her tunic is, 

Open at sides, and bound between 

With marguerites, I well devise, 

Of purest ray and most serene ; 

Her sleeves were loose and large, I ween, 

Inwrought with double gems so white ; 

Her kirtle was of self-suit sheen, 

With precious pearls around bedight. 
1 Thing, or person. 



10 PEARL 

A subtle crown yet wore that girl 
Of marguerites and no other stone, 
High pinnacled with clear white pearl, 
With fretted flowerets thereon ; 
Nought else upon her hair's fair curl, 
Which hung in locks her neck adown : 
Her look was grave as duke or earl, 
Her hue more white than walrus-bone, 
As gold refined her tresses shone, 
That on her shoulders lay loose and light ; 
Their deep colour yet needed none 
Of the precious pearls that her robe bedight. 



Bedight and broidered was each hem, 

At hands, at sides, at overture, 

With white pearl and none other gem ; 

And burnished white was her vesture. 

But a wondrous pearl withouten wem 

In her mid breast was set. so sure, 

No stone in royal diadem 

In price with that jewel might measure. 
Methinks no tongue might e'er endure 
To tell the glory of that sight, 
So was it bright and clear and pure, 
That precious pearl that her breast bedight ! 



PEARL 11 

Bedight with pearls, that precious Piece 
Beyond the stream came down the shore ; 
No gladder man was 'twixt here and Greece 
Than I, when she came me before ; 
She was nearer to me than aunt or niece, 
And therefore was my joy the more. 
Then that rare maiden proffered me speech ; 
Inclining woman-like me before, 

She doffed her crown of rich tresore 

And hailed me with a voice so light, 

Well was me that I ever was bore 

To answer that Sweet, with pearls bedight. 



" O Pearl," quoth I, " with pearls bedight, 
Art thou my Pearl that I have plained, 
With yearnings through the long lone night 
And bitter tears in secret rained ! 
Since earth received thee from my sight, 
Pensive, forlorn, I am for-pained, 
While thou art ever glad and bright 
In Paradise, of strife unstrained. 

What weird hath brought hither the gem of my heart, 

And set me in dole and great danger ? 

Since we two were sundered and set apart, 

I have been a joyless jeweller." 



PEARL 

That Jewel then, in gems arrayed, 

Raised her sweet face with eyes so grey, 

Set on her crown with pearls o'erlaid, 

And soberly thus began to say : 

" O Sir ! you have your tale misread, 

To say your Pearl is all away : l 

She is safe in a coffer now," she said, 

" Yea, in this garden gracious and gay, 

Herein to dwell for ever and play ; 

For sin nor mourning come never here ; 

This were thy treasure-hold, by my fay, 

If thou wert a gentle jeweller. 

" But, jeweller gentle, if thou shouldst lose 
Thy joy for a gem that thee was lief, 
Methinks thou art set on a mad purpose, 
And busied for short-lived matters and brief. 
For that thou hast lost was but a rose 
That flowered and faded, blossom and leaf, 
But now 'tis a pearl of price, hid close 
In a casket free from rust or grief. 

Yet thou hast called thy fate a thief, 

Which truly hath robbed thee of nought, I swear ; 

Thou blamest the cure of thy mischief; 

Thou art no gentle jeweller." 

1 cf. Daute, Purg. xxx. 127 and following. 



PEARL 13 

A jewel to me was then this Guest, 

And jewels rare each word she said ; 

" Good sooth," quoth I, " my blissful-best, 

My deep distress thou hast allay'd. 

To be excused I make request ; 

I deemed my Pearl was lost and dead : 

But, now she is found, I will hold her fast, 

And dwell with her ever in wild-wood shade, 
And love the laws that my Lord hath made, 
Who hath me brought to this bliss so near : 
Were I but with thee in yonder glade, 
I were a joyful jeweller." 

"Jeweller ! " said my Pearl so pale, 

" Why mock ye men, so mad ye be ? 

Three words hast thou spoken in that one tale, 1 

Random and redeless I doom all three. 

Full light they weigh in reason's scale ; 

Thy speech before thy wit did flee. 

Thou say'st, thou deemest me in this dale 

Because with eyen thou may'st me see : 

Again, thou weenest to come to me 

By passing beyond this water clear : 

And thirdly, to dwell in this countrie : 

That may no joyful jeweller. 
1 This use of ye and thee follows the original. 



14 PEARL 

" I hold the jeweller little to praise 
That loveth too well that he seeth with eye ; 
The man I blame as uncorteyse, 
That thinketh our Lord would speak a lie, 
Who surely swore your life to raise, 
Though fate should do your flesh to die : 
Ye take His words by wayward ways, 
In loving nought but what ye spy ; 
And that is a point of vainglory, 
That ill may a righteous man beseem, 
To trust no tale as true to try 
But so far as his reason alone may deem. 



" Deem now thyself if thou hast told 
Such words as man to God should say. 
Thou boastest to dwell in this Heavenly Hold, 
Where thou wert better humbly to pray, 
And yet He might the boon withhold : 
Again, thou would'st cross this waterway : 
But first thy corse must lie full cold, 
And grow compound with clod and clay ; 
For in Eden-grove thy flesh went stray, 
And dreary death must first redeem 
Our father's fault on that far day, 
Ere God o'er this river thy doom can deem." 



PEARL 15 

" Doomest thou me," quoth I, " my Sweet, 

To dolour again ? then am I undone ! 

One moment brief doth Fate me cheat 

With her sweet sight who must soon be gone. 

Why must I her both miss and meet ? 

My precious Pearl doth make me moan, 

And this bootless treasure must gar me greet, 1 

When I with dolour shall lose it anon. 
Now reck I never how lowly and lone 
I wander, afar from the land of my dream, 
Who have lost all part in this Pearl, mine own ! 
Nought now but endless woe can I deem." 

"Thou deemest nought but dire distress," 

Then said that maid ; " why dost thou so ? 

Oft may a man so weep for the less, 

That for clamour of grief he shall lose the moe. 

Thou oughtest better thyself to bless, 

And praise aye God in weal and woe ; 

For anger availeth thee not a cress. 

Spurn not the yoke whereto thou must bow : 
For, though thou dance as any doe, 
Brandish and bray as a froward team, 
Yet, since thou canst move neither to nor fro, 
Thou must needs abide what He shall deem. 

1 Make me weep. Both words are still used in Scotland. 



16 PEARL 

" Let God decree, let Him ordain ; 

Not one foot from His way will He writhe. 

Think not one mite from thy moaning to gain, 

Though thou for sorrow be never blithe. 

Stint from this strife ; let go complain, 

And seek His bliss full swift and swithe. 

Thy prayer may at last His pity obtain, 

That mercy shall thy trespass shrive ; 
His comfort may thy languor lithe, 1 
And thy woe be wafted away as a dream. 
Be thou marred or made, be thou rueful or blithe, 
All lieth in Him and as He shall deem." 

Then deemed 2 I to that damosel : 
" Forfend the wrath of my dear Lord ! 
What though my hasty speech rebel, 
Yet is my heart with ruth remorde 
As weltering water goeth from well : 
I ever beseech His misericorde ; 
Rebuke me never with words so fell, 
Though I go astray from mine own adored ; 

But grant me kindly your comforde, 

Piteously thinking upon this, 

Of care and me thou hast made accord 

That once wert cause of all my bliss. 
1 Soothe. 2 Here = spoke: cf. German meinen. 



PEARL 17 

" My bliss, my bale, thou hast been both ; 
But much the greater hath been my moan. 
Since thou wast caught away, forsooth, 
I never wist whither my Pearl was gone : 
But now that I see her, no more am I loth, 
For when we parted we were at one. 
God forbid we be now wroth, 
We meet so seldom by stick or by stone ! 

Courteous thy speech, yet am I undone, 

Who am but dust and heaviness ; 

But Christes mercy and Mary and John, 

These are the ground of all my bliss. 

" In bliss I see thee blithely blent, 

While I am thus cast down by fate. 

Thou takest thereon but little tent, 1 

Though I have oft the things I hate ; 

But now I am here in thy presente, 

I would beseech without debate 

To hear from thee, in sober assent, 

What life thou leadest early and late. 
For I am full glad that thine estate 
Is worthy worship and weal, ywis : 
This of my joy is the high gate, 
This is the ground of all my bliss." 
1 Care, attention. 



18 PEARL 

" Now bliss, good sir, may thee betide/' 
Answered that child so bright and clear, 
" And welcome here to walk or bide ; 
For now thy speech to me is dear. 
Masterful mood and lofty pride, 
I tell thee, are hated full bitterly here. 
My Master loveth not to chide, 
For meek are all that dwell Him near ; 
And when in His place thou shalt appear, 
Be deep devout in all meekness ; 
My Lord the Lamb loveth aye such cheer, 
That is the ground of all my bliss. 



" A blissful life, thou say'st, I lead, 
Whereof thou fain would'st know the stasre : 

o 

Thou mindest well, when thy Pearl was shed, 
She was full young and tender of age ; 
But my Lord the Lamb, through His Godhead, 
He took myself to His marriage, 
Crowned me queen when my soul He wed, 
In length of days from age to age. 
Yea, dowered with all His heritage 
His beloved are ; I am wholly His ; 
His praise, His price, His lofty stage 
Are root and ground of all my bliss." 



PEARL 19 

" Blest maid/' quoth I, " may this be true ? 

Displease not if I speak error : 

Art thou the Queen of heavens blue, 

To whom the world shall do honour ? 

We believe in Mary, from whom grace grew, 

That bare a bairn of virgin flower. 

Who might the crown from her remue, 

But one surpassing her favour ? 

Yet she, she is so singular 

We call her Phoenix of Araby, 

That bird of form so sweet and pure, 

Like to the Queen of Courtesy." 



" Courteous Queen ! " said that child so bright, 
Kneeling to ground with veiled face ; 
" Matchless mother and fairest to sight, 
Blessed beginner of every grace ! " 
Then rose she up and stood upright, 
And spake toward me in that place : 
"Sir, many attain to God's own light ; 
But no usurpers bide in this place : 
All the heavens that Empress hath, 
And earth and hell are in her fee : 
From her heritage yet will none her chase, 
For she is Queen of Courtesy. 



20 PEARL 

" The court of the kingdom of God Alive 

Hath this virtue in itself being, 

Each soul that may therein arrive 

Of all the realm is queen or king ; 

And never shall one another deprive, 

But each is glad of the other's having, 

And would that his crown were better by five, 

If possible were their bettering. 

But my Lady, of whom the Christ did spring, 
Holdeth the rule over us full high, 
And none are envious of that thing : 
For she is Queen of Courtesy. 



" By courtesy, as saith St. Paul, 

All we are members of Jesu Christ ; 

Leg and arm and trunk and poll 

Pertain to the body full true and tryst ; 

Right so is every Christian soul 

A limb that doth in Him subsist ; 

Then look thou bear no hate or gall, 

To mar thy members or be-twist. 

Though jewels gleam on thy Finger or Wrist, 
Doth thy Head then grudge those gems to see ? 
So fare we all with love and list 
To the King and Queen of Courtesy." 



PEARL 21 

" Courtesy, maiden, I well believe 

And charity great be you among ; 

But (pardon if my speech doth grieve,) 

Methinks thou speakest now full wrong. 

Thyself in heaven too high dost heave, 

To make thee a queen, that wert so young. 

What more honour might he achieve 

That had suffered in this world brave and strong, 

And lived in penance his whole life long, 

With bodily pain his bliss to buy ? 

What glory more might to him belong, 

Than be crowned by the King, in courtesy ? 

" That courtesy is too free in deed, 
If it be sooth that thou dost say ; 
Not two brief years with us didst lead, 
Too young to please thy God or pray, 
Nor never knew'st thou Pater or Creed 
And yet made queen on thy first day ! 
I may not trow it, so God me speed, 
That He would deal so wrong a way. 

Of countess, damosel, par ma fay, 

'Twere fair in heaven to hold the state ; 

Or e'en to be lady of less array ; 

But a queen ! That is too dear a date." 1 
1 End, goal, aim. 



PEARL 

" There is no date of His goodness/' 
Said then to me that maiden white ; 
" For all is truth that He doth trace, 
Nor may He do nor think but right. 
As Matthew telleth in your Mass, 
In soothful Gospel of God Almight, 
From him thou may'st the ensample guess, 
For he likeneth it to heaven's delight. 
My realm, He saith, is like on height 
To a lord that had a rich estate ; 
Of time of year the term was tight, 1 
To labour vines was now the date. 

" That date of year these servants knew : 
The lord, full early up he rose 
To sort his vine with workers due, 
And some he found to his purpose. 
Full soon to good accord they drew 
For a penny a day ; and forth each goes 
To wrythe and to work in labour true, 
To prune and pare and bind full close. 
At noon, again, the good lord chose 
Others that idle in market sate. 
' Why stand ye so idle ? ' he said to those 
' Hath this long day for you no date ? ' 
1 Close. 



PEARL 23 

" ' Ere date of day are we hither come/ 
(Thus they answered with one same thought ;) 
' We have standen here since rose the sun 
And no man biddeth us do right nought/ 
' Go into my vine, do that ye can/ 
(The master thus these servants taught,) 
' Such hire shall ye have ere the day be run 
As a righteous lord to his workmen ought/ 
Then went they into the vine and wrought ; 
And thus all day went the lord his gate, 
And new men into his vine he brought, 
Till day was well-nigh passed date. 

" At the date of day, at evensong, 

One hour before the sun went down, 

He saw there idle men full strong 

And said to them with sober sound : 

' Why stand ye so idle this whole day long ? ' 

' Our hire/ said they, 'is nowhere bound/ 

' Go into my vine, ye yeomen young, 

And work as ye may ere the sun be down/ 

Soon the world became right brown, 1 

The great sun sank, and the hour waxed late ; 

To take their hire he made summoun ; 

The weary day was past its date. 

1 In older English, as in Italian and French, this word fre 
quently means simply dark; cf. Dante, Inf. ii. 1. 



PEARL 

" The date of day the lord did know 

And called to the Reeve : ' Let pay my meinie : 

Give them the hire that I them owe ; 

And further, that none may me repreny, 1 

Set them all upon a row 

And give to each alike one penny. 

Begin at the last that standeth low 

Till to the foremost thou atteny.' 2 
And then the first began to pleny, 3 
And said that they had travailed sore : 
'These but one hour did strive and streny ; 4 
Us think us ought to take full more. 

" ' More have we served, us thinketh so, 
That suffered all the long day's heat, 
Than these that wrought not houres two ; 
Yet to us thou dost them counterfeit ! ' 
Said the lord to one that answered so : 
' Friend, no wrong dost thou here get. 
Take that is thine own and go : 
Our bargain was at a penny set. 

Why beginnest thou now to fret ? 

Was not a penny thy hire of yore ? 

No man may claim beyond his debt, 

Why then should'st thou thus ask for more ? ' 
Reprehend. 2 Attain. 3 Complain. 4 Strain. 



PEARL 25 

" ' More or less is my free gift 

To do with mine own whatso me please : 

Or else thine eye to evil is lift 

Because I am good, and just my pleas. 

Thus then/ quoth the lord, ' shall I make shift : 

The last shall have the first release, 

And the first be last, run he never so swift ; 

For many be called, though few encrease. 
Thus the poorest shall have his ease, 
Though late he come and little his power ; 
For, albeit his toil full early cease, 
The mercy of God is much the more.' 



" More have I of joy and bliss herein, 
Of ladyship great and life's full bloom, 
Than all the wives in the world might win, 
Seeking their own by righteous doom. 
Though night was nigh ere I could begin, 
(So late was I to the vineyard come,) 
First of them all my hire did I win, 
And was paid outright the whole full sum. 
Yet others had labour more burdensome, 
Toiling and sweating from hour to hour, 
Whose time of reward is not yet come 
Nor shall be, perchance, for a whole year more." 



26 PEARL 

Then answered I in plainer speech : 
" Methinks thy tale is unreasonable. 
God doth His justice clearly teach, 
Or Holy Writ is but a fable. 
In Psalter a verse doth plainly preach 
That speaketh a point determinable : 
' Thou dealest his full deserts to each 
Thou high King ay preterminable.' l 

Now, if one have stood the whole day stable, 
And thou to payment come him before, 
Then the less in work is to take more able ; 
And ever the longer, the less the more." 

" Of more or less in God's high realm," 
Quoth that sweet maid, " is no debate : 
For there doth each receive the same, 
Little be his deserving or great. 
Whether the Lord deal honour or shame, 
He keepeth truly no niggard estate, 
But lavisheth gifts as water from dam, 
Or as deep sea-waves that never abate. 
Free are all that humbly wait 
On Him that conquered sin below : 
What tongue may tell their glory's weight ? 
For the grace of God is great enow. 
1 Prescient, able to determine beforehand. 



PEARL 27 

" But me thou now wouldst fain checkmate, 
That I have ill earned my penny here. 
Thou say'st that I, who came so late, 
Am nothing worthy a prize so dear. 
But knew'st thou ever a mortal yet, 
Be he ever so holy in his prayer, 
That forfeited never, by somekind gate, 
Sometime, the meed of heaven clear ? 

And aye the ofter, the older they were, 

They leften right and wroughten woe. 

Mercy and grace then must them steer, 

For the grace of God is great enow. 



" But enow of grace hath the innocent, 
New born and signed with Christ's own sign 
In water of the sacrament ; 
Then is he brought into the Vine. 
Yet soon his hour of day is spent, 
Death's mighty arms the babe entwine 
That wrought no wrong ere thence he went ; 
Then doth the Lord each hire assign. 

These took His work, they bode therein ; 

Why should He not their labour allow 

And pay forthwith in silver fine ? 

For the grace of God is great enow. 



PEARL 

" Enow 'tis known that man, complete, 
Was wrought at first to bliss parfite : 
This did our forefather forfeit 
By that forbidden apple-bite. 
All we were damned for that meat, 
To die in dole, far from delight, 
And wend forthwith to hell's fierce heat, 
Therein to dwell without respite. 
But Mercy came in hell's despite, 
Rich blood that from the rood did flow 
And water ; thus at our worst plight 
The grace of God waxed great enow. 



" Enow there waxed from out that well 
Blood and water from that broad wound ! 
The blood us bought from bale of hell 
And delivered us from death the secounde : 
The water is baptism, sooth to tell, 
That foiled the glaive so grimly ground, 
And washeth away the guilt so fell 
Wherein our father Adam was drowned. 
Now is there not in the whole world round 
A let to bliss or a cause of woe, 
But He therefor a cure hath found : 
For the grace of God is great enow. 



PEARL 

" Grace enow a man may have 

That sinneth anew, so he truly repent"; 

But with sorrow and sighing he must it crave, 

And bide such pain as thereto is bent. 

Yet reason doth for ever save, 

As right would have it, the innocent. 

It is a doom God never gave 

That ever the guiltless should be shent. 

The guilty may indeed repent, 

And come to grace in sin's despite ; 

But who to guile did ne'er consent 

In innocence is safe and right. 



" Right thus I know well in this case 
Two sorts of men shall see God's eye ; 
The righteous man shall see His face, 
The harmless wight shall come Him nigh : 
As saith the Psalm in a certain phrase, 
' Lord, who shall climb Thine hill so high 
Or rest within Thine holy place ? ' 
Himself forthwith doth make reply : 
' Servants who ne'er did harm or ill, 
That are of heart both clean and light, 
In God's high realm shall rest full still : ' 
The innocent aye is safe by right. 



PEARL 

" The righteous man may be certain, 
Approach he shall that proper pile, 
That taketh not his life in vain 
Nor glavereth his neighbour with no guile 
Of this just man saw Solomon plain, 
How kindly the King on him doth smile : 
To him He maketh the rough ways plain, 
And showeth the Realm of God awhile, 
As who saith : ' Lo ! yon lovely isle, 
Thou may'st it win if thou be wight, 
But scarcely yet without perile : ' 
The innocent is aye safe by right. 



" 'Twas said of one, I know well whom, 
David in Psalter, that never lied : 
' Lord ! draw never Thy servant to doom, 
For none living to Thee is justified/ 
Wherefore to court when thou shalt come, 
Where all our causes shall be tried, 
Think on this text ; to wrath give room ; 
And leave thy fancied rights aside. 
So He on rood that bloody died, 
Whose hands the cruel nails did bite, 
Grant thee to pass at that solemn tide 
By innocence, and not by right ! 



PEARL 31 

" He who to read aright doth know 
May see the Book, and there be taught 
How Jesus walked, long years ago, 
And folk their bairns unto Him brought ; 
For hap and heal that thence did flow, 
To touch their children they Him besought. 
His disciples blamed to see them so, 
And held them back, with grudging thought. 
Then said Jesu : ' Forbid them nought, 
Suffer the children come to Me tight : 
For such was the heavenly kingdom bought.' 
The innocent is aye safe by right. 

" He called on His disciples mild, 

And said, this realm no wight might win 

But he come thither right as a child, 

Or else come nevermore therein : 

Harmless, true, and undefiled, 

Withouten spot of soiling sin. 

When such shall knock upon the bield, 1 

Swift shall man them the gate unpin. 
There is the purest bliss to win, 
That the jeweller sought so early and late, 
And sold all his goods, both woollen and linne, 2 
To buy him a Pearl Immaculate. 
1 Gate (cf. its use in Burns). 2 Linen. 



32 PEARL 

" This spotless Pearl that is bought so dear, 
And cost the jeweller all his good, 
Is like to the heavenly kingdom clear, 
(So spake the Father of fold and flood ;) 
For it is wemless, clean, sincere, 
And endless round, and blithe of mood, 
And common to all that righteous were : 
Lo ! even in midst my breast it stood. 
My lord the Lamb, Who shed His blood, 
This gem hath here as a peace-pledge set 
I bid thee forsake this world so rude 
And purchase the Pearl Immaculate." 



" O Spotless Pearl in pearls so pure, 

That bearest," quoth I, " the Pearl of Price ! 

Who formed thee thy fair figure ? 

That wrought thy garment, He was full wise ! 

Thy beauty came never of our nature ; 

Pygmalion painted not those sweet eyes, 

Nor Aristotle, with all his lettrure, 

Could tell no tithe of thy properties. 

Thy colour passeth the fleur-de-lys, 

Thy angel -bearing is so sedate, 

Tell me, bright child, what troth hath its prize 

In such a Pearl Immaculate ? " 



PEARL 

" My Spotless Lamb on His high seat, 
My dear betrothed Lord," quoth she, 
" Chose me for His, howe'er unmeet. 
That was the bridal-day for me 
When I left your world of salt tears wet, 
And came to this land of gladsome glee. 
' Come hither to me, my true-love sweet, 
For mote nor spot is none in thee ! ' 
He gave me might and great beaute, 
And washed me in blood remediate, 
And crowned me clean in virginte, 
And decked me with pearls immaculate. 



" O spotless maid that bright dost flame 

In royal array so rich and rife ! 

What kind of king may be that Lamb 

That thee would wed unto His wife ? 

Over all others so high thou clamb, 

To lead with Him so ladyly life ! 

So many fair maids in maidenly shame 

For Christ have lived through storm and strife, 
And thou, whose course was here so brief, 
Hast pressed them past to so high estate, 
All by thyself so stout and stiff, 
A peerless maid and immaculate ! " 

C 



34 PEARL 

" Immaculate," quoth that mirthful queen, 
" Unblemisht I am withouten blot ; 
So far may I with grace maintene, 
But peerless queen, that said I not. 
The Lamb's fair wives in bliss we bene, 
A hundred and forty thousand, I wot, 
As in the Apocalypse it is seen : 
Saint John them saw all in a knot ; 
On the hill of Zion, that seemly spot, 
The Apostle them saw in ghostly dream, 
Arrayed to the wedding on that hill-cop 
The New City of Jerusalem. 



" Of Jerusalem here in speech I spell. 
If thou wilt know what kind He be, 
My Lamb, my Lord, my dear Jewel, 
My joy, my bliss, my leman free, 
Of him did the prophet Esaias tell : 
Piteously of his debonairte 
That guiltless soul went down to hell 

o 

Withouten cause of felony. 

As a sheep to the slaughter led was He, 
And, as lamb before shearer is dumb and tame, 
So closed He His mouth from each query, 
When Jews Him judged in Jerusalem, 



PEARL 35 

" In Jerusalem was my leman slain, 
And rent on rood by ruffians bold ; 
All our bale on Him hath He ta'en, 
And readily borne our cares so cold. 
With buffets was His meek face flayen, 
That was so fair for to behold ; 
For sin He set Himself in vain, 
That never to sin Himself had sold. 

For us bare tortures manifold, 

And stretched His arms on a rugged beam ; 

As meek as lamb that no plaint told, 

He suffered for us in Jerusalem. 



" Jerusalem, Jordan, and Galilee 

The baptism saw of good Saint John, 

As spake Esaias, so spake he : 

When Jesus was to him-ward gone, 

He said of Him this prophecy : 

' Lo ! God's own Lamb as true as stone, 

Who maketh the world from all trespass free 

That every man hath thought or done.' 

Himself thought not nor wrought not none, 

Yet to Himself He did all claim ; 

His generation who reckon can, 

That died for us in Jerusalem ? 



36 PEARL 

" In Jerusalem thus my leman sweet 
Twice for a Lamb was taken there 
By true record of each prophete, 
For His mood so meek and His gentle fare. 
The third time find we His title meet 
In the book of Apocalypse written full fair ; 
In midst of the saints on His judgment-seat 
The Apostle saw Him bright and clear, 
Reading the Book with leaves so square, 
With seven great signets set like a hem : 
And at that sight all quaked for fear, 
In hell, in earth and Jerusalem. 



" This Jerusalem Lamb had never a stain 
Of aught but white, like pearl alive : 
No mote nor blemish might Him attain, 
Or touch His fleece so rich and rife. 
This same white hue doth therefore reign 
Throughout each soul that is His wife. 
Though fresh souls daily join our train, 
Among us cometh nor hate nor strife, 

But each single one we would were five ; 

The more the merrier, so God me bless ! 

In company great our love doth thrive, 

In honour more and never the less. 



PEARL 37 

" Less of bliss may none us bring, 
That bear this pearl upon our breast ; 
For we who touched no sinful thing 
Wear here of spotless pearls the crest : 
Although our corses in clods must cling, 
While ye cry for ruth withouten rest, 
We see and know our heavenly King, 
In His one death our hope is drest : 
Our care is cast upon His breast, 
He feasteth us with His fulness, 
The bliss of each is fairest and best, 
And never one's honour is any the less. 



" Lest thou deem my tale but empty sound, 
Hear now St. John's revealed lore : 
I saw the Lamb that Satan bound 
Stand on the Mount as conqueror, 
With virgins a hundred thousand around, 
Arid four and forty thousand more : 
On all their foreheads written I found 
The Lamb's high name, that His father bore. 
A voice I heard like to the roar 
Of waters weltering numberless, 
Or thunder thrown on some pale tower : 
That voice methinks did sound no less. 



38 PEARL 

' ' Loud as that trumpet-voice did blaze, 
And thunderous as its echoes were, 
A note full new I heard them raise ; 
Joyful and pleasant it was to hear. 
As harpers harp to their own lays, 
So sang they that new song full clear : 
One maiden led those notes of praise, 
And the rest in choir did follow her. 
Right before the Lord's high chair, 
And the four Beasts that Him confess 
And the Elder-men so staid of cheer, 
Their song they sungeii never the less 

" Natheless was no man never so wise, 

For all the crafts that ever he knew, 

To sing one point of that service, 

Save those sweet choirs the Lamb that sue. 

For they have been sundered from earthly vice 

As first fruits to the Saviour due. 

To Him they are joined in Paradise, 

Like to Himself in look and hue : 
For never leasing nor tale untrue 
Touched their pure tongue for no distress : 
That spotless meinie may never remue 1 
From that stainless Master never the less." 
1 Move away. 



PEARL 39 

" Never the less I give thee thank, 
Dear Pearl, though I question thee so close. 
I should not tempt thy wit so frank, 
Who art to Christ's own chamber y-chose. 
I am but muck and ordure rank, 
And thou so rich and royal a rose, 
And bidest here by this blissful bank 
Where life may never her sweetness lose ! 

Dear heart, that wast once of so simple compose, 

I would thee ask a thing express : 

Churlish am I and uncouth to glose, 

Let my prayer avail me never the less. 



" Nevertheless on thee I call, 
If thou see that it may be done, 
As thou art glorious withouten gall, 
Gainsay thou never my rueful boon. 
Have ye 110 dwelling in castle wall 
Nor manor where ye may meet at one ? 
Thou speak'st of Jerusalem rich, royal, 
Where David dear was dight on throne, 
But it may not be in this forest lone : 
In Judea is that fair city, God wot ! 
As ye are stainless under the moon, 
Your dwelling should be withouten spot. 



40 PEARL 

"This spotless choir, sweet damozel, 
Thousands throng in this great rout : 
Since then ye are so many to tell, 
Great must be your city, methought. 
So many a rich and rare jewel, 
'Twere parlous to let them lie without ; 
Yet see I no strong citadel, 
Though all these banks I spy about. 

In one place ye dwell, beyond all doubt, 
To gaze on His glory Whom God begot ; 
If thou hast another castle stout, 
Now teach me the way to that merry spot. 



" That spot in Jewry," said then my Gem, 

" Whereof thy tongue so lately spake, 

That is the city whereto the Lamb 

Did go to suffer for man's sad sake ; 

To wit, the Old Jerusalem 

Where the old guilt was done to slake. 

But the New, that straight from God down came, 

The Apostle John for his theme did take. 

The Lamb there, clean from blemish black, 

Hath ferried hither this fair float; 

And, as His flock is withouten fleck, 

So is His dwelling free from spot. 



PEARL 41 

" Of these two spots the truth now glean : 
Jerusalem hight each of these, 
Which name ywis no more cloth mean 
Than < City of God/ or ' Sight of Peace.' 
In the first, deep peace was made between 
Mankind and God, through the Lamb's decease. 
In that other is none but peace to glean 
That aye shall last without release. 

That is the bourn whereto we press, 

Whenas our flesh is laid to rot ; 

There glory and bliss shall ever increase 

To the meinie that is withouten spot." 



" Spotless maiden so meek and mild," 
Then said I to that lovely Flower, 
(t Bring me but once to that noble bield, 
And let me see thy blissful bower." 
" Sir," said she whom God shall shield, 
" Thou may'st not enter within His tower ; 
But the Holy Larnb to thee will yield 
A sight thereof, through great favour. 

Without, thou shalt see that clean cloistour 
But inward seest thou never a jot. 
To stretch in that street thou hast no vigour, 
But if thou wert clean withouten spot. 



42 PEARL 

" If I that spot shall now un-hide, 
Bend upward to this streamlet's head, 
And I against thee on this side, 
Until thou see a broad hill spread." 
Then would I no longer bide, 
But stole through many a flowery mead ; 
Till, from a hill that I espied, 
I saw its dazzling radiance shed. 
Beyond the swirling river-bed 
It shone more radiant than the sun : 
In Apocalypse is its fashion said 
As deviseth it the Apostle John. 



Even as it met the Apostle's sight, 
Saw I that city of great renown, 
The New Jerusalem, royally dight 
As it was let from heaven adown. 
Its bulwarks burned with gold so bright, 
As burnished glass that gleams around, 
With noble gems all underpight, 
And pillars twelve on their bases bound : 
On twelve great slabs the Lord did found 
Those walls, and each a precious stone ; 
As standeth written of this fair town 
In Apocalypse of the Apostle John. 



PEARL 

As John the stones in writ did name, 
Knew I their name after his tale, 
Jasper hight the foremost gem, 
For first foundation, nothing frail, 
Gleaming green in the lowest hem : 
Secondly, sapphire did I hail : 
Chalcedony then withouten wem 
In the third course shone pure and pale 
Emerald the fourth, so green of scale, 
And fifth came sweet sardonyx stone : 
The sixth was ruby, after the tale 
Of Apocalypse by the Apostle John. 



To these joined John the chrysolite 
As seventh gem in fundament : 
The eighth, the beryl clear and white : 
Next, twin-hued topaz excellent : 
Chrysoprase the tenth stone hight : 
The eleventh, jacynth rich and quaint : 
The twelfth, that burned with mellowest light, 
Was amethyst purple with azure blent. 
The walls, that on this basement leant, 
Were jasper clear as glass that shone : 
I knew it by the devisement 
In Apocalypse of the Apostle John. 



44 PEARL 

As John devised, so saw I there ; 
These twelve degrees were steep and wide ; 
The city stood above foursquare, 
And foursquare was each several side ; 
Through streets of gold so glassy clear 
The jasper walls arose in pride : 
Within, the dwellings adorned were 
With stones that earthly gems outvied. 
Twelve furlong space I well descried 
The measure of this heavenly town ; 
As high as long, as long as wide, 
By the measure of the Apostle John. 



As wrote the Apostle, so saw we 
Three lofty portals every way ; 
Twelve gates, adorned in symmetry 
With fretted gold in rich array ; 
Each gate a single marjorie, 
A pearl too perfect for decay ; 
Each doth a name, writ fair to see, 
Of Israel's twelve tribes, display : 
Each tribe in order, that is to say 
The eldest first, was writ thereon : 
These streets shone with so fair a ray, 
They needed neither sun nor moon. 



PEARL 45 

Of sun nor moon they had no need, 
The self God was their lamp and light ; 
The Lamb their lantern was in deed, 
By Him the borough glistened bright. 
Through wall and roof my eye could read, 
That were transparent to the sight ; 
The throne aloft there might ye heed, 
With all the adornments round bedight 
Whereof the Apostle John did write ; 
The High God's self sat thereupon, 
A river ran from that throne outright, 
Was brighter than both sun and moon. 



Sun nor moon shone never so sweet 

As the flood that flowed from that throne so fair ; 

Swiftly it swirled through every street 

Its stainless waves of crystal clear : 

Kirk was none in that high seat, 

Nor chapel nor temple whatsoe'er ; 

The Almighty was their minster meet, 

The Lamb their redeeming sacrifice there. 

The portals never closed were, 

But ever open, late and soon ; 

There entereth none, I durst well swear, 

That beareth any spot under moon. 



46 PEARL 

The moon hath there no sheen nor might, 
Too spotted she is, of body too grim ; 
And also there is never night, 
What needeth the moon her course to climb, 
And to even herself with that noble light 
That shineth upon the river's brim ? 
The planets are in too poor a plight, 
And the sun himself is all too dim. 

Round that river are trees of every clime, 
That bear twelve fruits of life full soon ; 
Twelve times a year is their blossom at prime, 
And their fruit reneweth at every moon. 



Anunder moon so great mervail 
No fleshly heart might e'er endure 
As this which did my sight assail, 
So wondrous bright in portraiture : 
I stood as still as dazed quail, 
For marvel of that fair figure, 
Unapt to rest as to travail 
For ravishment of that gleam so pure : 
For I dare say, with conscience sure, 
Had mortal man abidden that boon, 
Though all wise clerks had him in cure, 
His life were lost anunder moon. 



PEARL 47 

Right as the mighty moon doth rise 

Ere thence the day-gleam driveth down, 

So suddenly, in so wondrous wise, 

I was aware of a procession : 

This noble city of rich emprise 

Was suddenly full, without summon, 

Of virgins, all in that same guise 

As was my blest one 'neath her crown : 

And crowned were all in the same fashion, 

Arrayed in pearls and weeds of white ; 

On each one's breast was firmly bound 

That blissful pearl of great delight. 



With great delight they glided fair 
On golden ways that glent like glass ; 
Hundred thousands I wot there were, 
And all in suit their livery was. 
'Twas hard to choose the gladdest there : 
The Lamb before did proudly pass 
With seven horns of red gold clear ; 
As precious pearls his garment was. 
Toward the throne they gently pace 
In crowds, yet orderly to the sight, 
And mild as modest maids at Mass ; 
So drave they forth with great delight. 



48 PEARL 

The glad delight of His appear, 
Too much it were for me to tell ; 
To these Elder-men when He came near, 
Grovelling at His feet they fell ; 
Legions of angels gathered there, 
Scattering their incense of sweet smell ; 
And all was glory and gladsome cheer, 
For all sang love to that gay Jewel. 

The strain might strike through earth and Hell 

That these heavenly Powers in their joy endite ; 

For love of the Lamb this praise doth swell, 

In sooth I caught a great delight. 



Delight, as I strove this Lamb to devise, 
Hand in hand with marvel went ; 
Best was He, blithest and most to prize, 
That ever I heard in discourse spent ; 
So snowy white was His outward guise, 
His looks so simple, Himself so gent; 
But a wide wet wound in wondrous wise, 
Right to His heart full red was rent, 

From His white side the blood out-sprent ; 

" Alas ! " thought I, " who did that spite ? " 

Any breast for bale might well have brent, 

Ere he thereto had had delight. 



PEARL 49 

Yet His delight none doubted then, 
Though He were hurt and such wound had ; 
For nought was in His semblant seen, 
So glorious were His looks and glad. 
I looked among His train so sheen, 
How bright they were, and nothing sad : 
Then saw I there my little Queen 
Whom last I saw within the glade : 

Lord ! merry was the mirth she made, 

Among her fellows that were so white. 

It drove me through that stream to wade 

For love-longing and great delight. 

Delight drove through me, eye and ear, 
Melted to madding my manly mood ; 
When I saw my dear, I would fain be there, 
Though she were held beyond that flood : 
No thing, methought, might give me fear, 
Though every hindrance me withstood ; 
Start I but once to cross this mere, 
I will swim the rest, though it cost my blood ! 

But sudden fell this rebel mood 

That stirred me to start in the stream astray, 

And humbler, calmer thoughts ensued ; 

It was not to my Prince's pay. 1 
1 Pleasure. 

D 



50 PEARL 

It payed Him not that I should dare 
Those swirling waters to invade 
In headlong rage or dark despair : 
Swiftly therefrom was I restayed ; 
For, as I stood all ready there, 
At that wild thought my dream did fade. 
Then wakened I in that Arbour fair, 
My head upon that Mound was laid 

Where my sweet Pearl to ground had strayed ; 

I roused me, and fell in great affray : 

And, sighing, to myself I said, 

" Now all be to that Prince's pay ! " 



Me payed full ill to be cast forth 
So suddenly from that fair region, 
From all those sights of joy and mirth : 
A heavy longing struck me in swoon, 
And heavily came my words to birth : 
" O Pearl/' quoth I, " of rich renown, 
'Tis my sole solace here on earth 
That thou hast brought me this vision. 
If it be true that thou, mine own, 
Farest for ever in garlands so gay, 
Then well is me in this dim dungeon 
That thou art to this Prince's pay." 



PEARL 51 

To that Prince's pay I aye had bent, 
Nor yearned for more than me was given ; 
I held me there in true intent 
At bidding of my dear Pearl in heaven ; 
Had grace me drawn to Goddes presente, 
To more of His mysteries had I been driven ; 
But aye would man more good hap hent 
That should by right upon him cleaven : 
Therefore my joy too soon was riven, 
And I cast forth from the Realms of Day. 
Lord, mad are they that against Thee striven, 
Or pray Thee for ought against Thy pay. 



The Prince's yoke is ever light 
To those who love His peace divine, 
For I have found Him, both day and night, 
A God, a Lord, a Friend full fine. 
Thus mused I, stretched on earth outright, 
Plaining my Pearl with bitter brine, 
Committing to God that Jewel bright 
In Christes dear blessing and mine, 
That in the form of bread and wine 
The priest us showeth every day. 
Lord, make us servants true of Thine 
And precious pearls unto Thy pay ! 



Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & Co. 
Edinburgh <5^ London 



PR Pearl (Middle English poem) 

2111 Pearl 

A224 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 

